# Patrick Henry Ignites the American Revolution {#part0024.html_c17 .toc}

::: block
*"Is life so dear, or peace so sweet, as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery? Forbid it, Almighty God! I know not what course others may take; but as for me, give me liberty, or give me death!"*
:::

On March 23, 1775---the same day that Edmund Burke was urging conciliation with America in London's House of Commons---a thirty-eight-year-old self-taught lawyer named Patrick Henry rose in St. John's Church in Richmond, Virginia, where 122 of the colony's delegates were meeting. The church's windows were open on the fine spring day to let a crowd gather outside listen to the deliberations of the British colony's representatives. Henry handed a series of resolutions to the clerk, who read them out, concluding, "Resolved therefore, That this Colony be immediately put into a posture of defence; and that \[blank\] be a Committee to prepare a plan for the embodying, arming, and disciplining such a number of men as may be sufficient for that purpose." As the proposer, Henry would have been the first called upon to speak for his resolutions, although the initial lines of his reported speech refer graciously []{#part0024.html_page97}to colleagues who differed with him; perhaps he alluded to what they had said the day before.

He spoke without notes; at least, none have ever been found. His speech began in a quiet smolder and ended ablaze with passion. A Baptist clergyman present wrote of the orator's crescendo, "The tendons of his neck stood out white and rigid, like whipcords. His voice rose louder and louder, until the walls of the building and all within them seemed to shake and rock in its tremendous vibrations. Finally his pale face and glaring eyes became terrible to look upon. Men leaned forward in their seats with the heads strained forward, their faces pale and their eyes glaring like the speaker's.... When he sat down, I felt sick with excitement." No applause; no known reply; Richard Henry Lee seconded the resolutions; Thomas Jefferson and Thomas Nelson were reported to have spoken in favor. The vote was called for and taken; the resolutions carried by a narrow margin of five, and the American Revolution in the largest colony was under way.

With "This is no time for ceremony," the speaker goes right to the heart of the matter: "freedom or slavery." His rhetorical approach is one of loaded question and scathing reply. Q.: "Are fleets and armies necessary to a work of love and reconciliation?" A.: "These are the implements of war and subjugation...." Q.: "Shall we try argument?" A.: "Sir, we have been trying that for the last ten years."

The past pleas to the crown are listed in an active parallel construction: "We have petitioned; we have remonstrated; we have supplicated...." The answers are recounted in parallel also, but in the passive, leaving George III out of it: "Our petitions have been slighted; our remonstrances have produced additional violence and insult; our supplications have been disregarded...."

When Henry says, "An appeal to arms and the God of Hosts is all that is left us," on top of his earlier refusal to commit "an act of disloyalty towards the majesty of heaven," he is directly referring to a euphemism put forward a century before: English philosopher John Locke, in advancing the courageous idea that man had natural, God-given rights, was presuming to say that these superseded the divine right of kings, but---to save his life---couched his justification for revolution to unseat an unjust monarch in the phrase "an appeal to heaven." This idea under-girded the philosophy Jefferson expressed later in the Declaration of Independence, and the religious image was used by the fiery Henry in calling for what he never named: revolution.

He then knocks down the arguments used against the revolutionaries. "They tell us, sir, that we are weak...." He answers that time is not on the colonists' side, that the king will grow stronger, but that "the battle... []{#part0024.html_page98}is not to the strong alone; it is to the vigilant, the active, the brave." The men gathered in the church could fairly hear echoes of Ecclesiastes 9:11: "The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong...." And then he adds the crusher: there is no real choice when the alternatives are fighting for liberty or submission to slavery. "The war is inevitable," he concludes, but not in despair, "---and let it come!"

In the peroration, he flays his audience with rhetorical questions, three short and then one long, setting up his answer choosing death rather than slavery. Note the breath, or beat, provided by "I know not what course others may take"; it enables the orator to deliver the punch line with such added force that it echoes down through history.

One small question: Is this what Patrick Henry really said? We know he spoke that day; we know he made a powerful impact with his speech; but we do not know if the speech that has come down to us is the speech he gave. No notes; no manuscript then or later; no contemporaneous account. The first publication of the speech, in 1816, came forty-one years after the Richmond convention, taken from William Wirt's then forthcoming biography of Patrick Henry, who died in 1799. Evidence that the final line was accurate comes from the slogan on the flag of the militia that subsequently served under him: "Liberty or Death." (One rebel wag noted he preferred a less severe "Liberty or Be Crippled.")

In a doctoral dissertation on the authenticity of the Wirt transcript, Stephen T. Olsen---using traditional methods of historical research as well as computer analysis of texts---argues that sometime between 1805 and 1815 biographer Wirt elicited a reconstituted transcript from a friend, federal judge St. George Tucker, who claimed to have been a spectator in the church when Henry delivered his speech. Other scholarship may refute this one day, but until then, my own judgment is that Patrick Henry made a rousing speech that day that did conclude with the line about liberty or death; that a generation later, to respond to the wishes of his friend writing a biography of the patriot, Judge Tucker recalled what he could and made up the rest. If that is so, Judge Tucker belongs among the ranks of history's best ghostwriters. Here is the Henry/Tucker/Wirt transcript in full:

\*\*\*

**[MR. PRESIDENT:]{.small}**

No man thinks more highly than I do of the patriotism, as well as abilities, of the very worthy gentlemen who have just addressed the House. But different men often see the same subject in different lights; and, therefore, I hope that it will not be thought disrespectful to those []{#part0024.html_page99}gentlemen, if, entertaining as I do opinions of a character very opposite to theirs, I shall speak forth my sentiments freely and without reserve. This is no time for ceremony. The question before the House is one of awful moment to this country. For my own part I consider it as nothing less than a question of freedom or slavery; and in proportion to the magnitude of the subject ought to be the freedom of the debate. It is only in this way that we can hope to arrive at truth, and fulfill the great responsibility which we hold to God and our country. Should I keep back my opinions at such a time, through fear of giving offense, I should consider myself as guilty of treason towards my country, and of an act of disloyalty towards the majesty of heaven, which I revere above all earthly kings.

Mr. President, it is natural to man to indulge in the illusions of hope. We are apt to shut our eyes against a painful truth, and listen to the song of that siren, till she transforms us into beasts. Is this the part of wise men, engaged in a great and arduous struggle for liberty? Are we disposed to be of the number of those who, having eyes, see not, and having ears, hear not, the things which so nearly concern their temporal salvation? For my part, whatever anguish of spirit it may cost, I am willing to know the whole truth---to know the worst and to provide for it.

I have but one lamp by which my feet are guided; and that is the lamp of experience. I know of no way of judging of the future but by the past. And judging by the past, I wish to know what there has been in the conduct of the British ministry for the last ten years, to justify those hopes with which gentlemen have been pleased to solace themselves and the House? Is it that insidious smile with which our petition has been lately received? Trust it not, sir; it will prove a snare to your feet. Suffer not yourselves to be betrayed with a kiss.

Ask yourselves how this gracious reception of our petition comports with these warlike preparations which cover our waters and darken our land. Are fleets and armies necessary to a work of love and reconciliation? Have we shown ourselves so unwilling to be reconciled that force must be called in to win back our love? Let us not deceive ourselves, sir. These are the implements of war and subjugation---the last arguments to which kings resort. I ask gentlemen, sir, what means this martial array, if its purpose be not to force us to submission? Can gentlemen assign any other possible motives for it? Has Great Britain any enemy, in this quarter of the world, to call for all this accumulation of navies and armies? No, sir, she has none. They are meant for us; they can be meant for no other. They are sent over to bind and rivet upon us those chains which the British ministry have been so long forging.

And what have we to oppose to them? Shall we try argument? Sir, we []{#part0024.html_page100}have been trying that for the last ten years. Have we anything new to offer on the subject? Nothing. We have held the subject up in every light of which it is capable; but it has been all in vain. Shall we resort to entreaty and humble supplication? What terms shall we find which have not been already exhausted? Let us not, I beseech you, sir, deceive ourselves longer.

Sir, we have done everything that could be done to avert the storm which is now coming on. We have petitioned; we have remonstrated; we have supplicated; we have prostrated ourselves before the throne, and have implored its interposition to arrest the tyrannical hands of the ministry and Parliament. Our petitions have been slighted; our remonstrances have produced additional violence and insult; our supplications have been disregarded; and we have been spurned, with contempt, from the foot of the throne. In vain, after these things, may we indulge the fond hope of peace and reconciliation. There is no longer any room for hope.

If we wish to be free---if we mean to preserve inviolate those inestimable privileges for which we have been so long contending---if we mean not basely to abandon the noble struggle in which we have been so long engaged, and which we have pledged ourselves never to abandon until the glorious object of our contest shall be obtained, we must fight! I repeat it, sir, we must fight! An appeal to arms and to the God of Hosts is all that is left us!

They tell us, sir, that we are weak---unable to cope with so formidable an adversary. But when shall we be stronger? Will it be the next week, or the next year? Will it be when we are totally disarmed, and when a British guard shall be stationed in every house? Shall we gather strength by irresolution and inaction? Shall we acquire the means of effectual resistance, by lying supinely on our backs, and hugging the delusive phantom of hope, until our enemies shall have bound us hand and foot?

Sir, we are not weak, if we make a proper use of the means which the God of nature hath placed in our power. Three millions of people, armed in the holy cause of liberty, and in such a country as that which we possess, are invincible by any force which our enemy can send against us. Besides, sir, we shall not fight our battles alone. There is a just God who presides over the destinies of nations, and who will raise up friends to fight our battles for us. The battle, sir, is not to the strong alone; it is to the vigilant, the active, the brave. Besides, sir, we have no election. If we were base enough to desire it, it is now too late to retire from the contest. There is no retreat but in submission and slavery! Our chains are forged! Their clanking may be heard on the plains of Boston! The war is inevitable---and let it come! I repeat it, sir, let it come!

[]{#part0024.html_page101}It is in vain, sir, to extenuate the matter. Gentlemen may cry, "Peace! Peace!"---but there is no peace. The war is actually begun! The next gale that sweeps from the north will bring to our ears the clash of resounding arms! Our brethren are already in the field! Why stand we here idle? What is it that gentlemen wish? What would they have? Is life so dear, or peace so sweet, as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery? Forbid it, Almighty God! I know not what course others may take; but as for me, give me liberty, or give me death!

[]{#part0025.html}
