# []{#part0038.html_page146 .calibre4}Churchill Rallies the British People after the "Miracle of Deliverance" at Dunkirk {#part0038.html_c31 .toc}

::: block
*"We shall not flag or fail... We shall fight on the beaches... we shall fight in the fields and in the streets... we shall never surrender."*
:::

The evacuation of 340,000 British soldiers from the beaches of Dunkirk on the continent of Europe, with 40,000 left behind to be taken prisoner by the Nazi forces, was called by Churchill "a miracle of deliverance," as if it were a kind of allied victory. But the retreat to the beaches and across the English Channel on May 26 and 27, 1940, was---as British Prime Minister Winston Churchill was reported to have said privately afterward---"the greatest military defeat for many centuries."

He spoke to the House of Commons on June 4, as directional signs were being taken down at crossroads throughout Britain in anticipation of Hitler's invasion. Three weeks before, he had delivered his speech offering nothing but "blood, toil, tears, and sweat" (see p. 143) but showing "buoyancy and hope" and concluding with a ringing "let us go forward together with our united strength." That was before Allied forces suffered a crushing defeat and the real possibility of the landing of German troops swept the country. Now a longer speech in a more somber mood was required, containing a report more detailed in its military analysis, and with some silver lining seen in the war cloud.

After reviewing the tactical defenses put up by the British, French, and Belgian "armies of the north," he reported how "the German eruption swept like a sharp scythe" around them. By showing how "the whole root and core and brain of the British Army... seemed about to perish or be led into an ignominious and starving captivity," he accentuated the worst case possible, which made the successful retreat a "miracle of deliverance" for which Britain should be grateful. His repetition of the biblical word "deliverance" was the cue to the press to refer to "the miracle of Dunkirk." By emphasizing the scope of the losses that were not suffered, the new prime minister lessened the impact of the defeat that took place.

Churchill was careful not to destroy his credibility by overtly minimizing []{#part0038.html_page147}the defeat that drove the British from the Continent and would be followed in three weeks by the surrender of France. "We must be very careful not to assign to this deliverance the attributes of a victory. Wars are not won by evacuations." Then came his crucial and upbeat *but*: "But there is a victory inside this deliverance... gained by the air force." Only after paying tribute to the few thousand young airmen who beat back the Luftwaffe in this engagement, and calling their future defense of the realm an unprecedented "opportunity for youth," did Churchill admit that the past week had been "a colossal military disaster."

The "We shall not flag or fail" peroration is as inspiring as any written in the twentieth century. He first sounds a note of defiance, "whatever the cost may be," then uses "we shall fight" seven times, culminating in "we shall never surrender." As a participant in World War I and as an historian, Churchill was surely familiar with the French leader Georges Clemenceau's defiant formulation in 1918, translated as "I shall fight in front of Paris, within Paris, behind Paris." Consciously or not, Churchill echoed that theme and improved on its rhythm in his unforgettable "We shall fight on the beaches... we shall fight in the fields and in the streets... we shall never surrender." (This may be apocryphal, but in the roar of cheering and applause that followed in the House of Commons, he added in an aside to a colleague, "And we'll fight them with the butt ends of broken beer bottles, because that's bloody well all we've got!")

Most orators would have ended on that high never-surrender note. But what makes Churchill's peroration especially powerful is its double change of pace and mood at the end: first solemnly recognizing the terrible consequences of failure with Britons "subjugated and starving," then ameliorating this depressing prospect with an expression of confidence that the New World---that is, the United States---supported by surviving British seapower, would "step forth to the rescue and the liberation of the old."

\*\*\*

**[...WHEN A WEEK]{.small}** ago today I asked the House to fix this afternoon for the occasion of a statement, I feared it would be my hard lot to announce from this box the greatest military disaster of our long history.

I thought, and there were good judges who agreed with me, that perhaps 20,000 or 30,000 men might be reembarked, but it certainly seemed that the whole French First Army and the whole British Expeditionary Force, north of the Amiens-Abbeville gap would be broken up in open field or else have to capitulate for lack of food and ammunition.

These were the hard and heavy tidings for which I called on the House []{#part0038.html_page148}and nation to prepare themselves a week ago. The whole root and core and brain of the British Army, on which and around which we were to build, and are to build, the great British armies in the later years of the war, seemed due to perish upon the field or to be led into an ignominious and starving captivity....

The surrender of the Belgian Army compelled the British Army at the shortest notice to cover a flank to the sea of more than thirty miles' length which otherwise would have been cut off. In doing this and closing this flank, contact was lost inevitably between the British and two of three corps forming the First French Army, who were then further from the coast than we were. It seemed impossible that large numbers of Allied troops could reach the coast. The enemy attacked on all sides in great strength and fierceness, and their main power, air force, was thrown into the battle.... For four or five days the intense struggle raged. All armored divisions, or what was left of them, together with great masses of German infantry and artillery, hurled themselves on the ever-narrowing and contracting appendix within which the British and French armies fought.

Meanwhile the Royal Navy, with the willing help of countless merchant seamen and a host of volunteers, strained every nerve and every effort and every craft to embark the British and Allied troops. Over 220 light warships and more than 650 other vessels were engaged. They had to approach this difficult coast, often in adverse weather, under almost ceaseless hail of bombs and increasing concentration of artillery fire. Nor were the seas themselves free from mines and torpedoes.

It was in conditions such as these that our men carried on with little or no rest for days and nights, moving troops across dangerous waters and bringing with them always the men whom they had rescued. The numbers they brought back are the measure of their devotion and their courage. Hospital ships, which were plainly marked, were the special target for Nazi bombs, but the men and women aboard them never faltered in their duty.

Meanwhile the Royal Air Force, which had already been intervening in the battle so far as its range would allow it to go from home bases, now used a part of its main metropolitan fighter strength to strike at German bombers.... The struggle was protracted and fierce. Suddenly the scene has cleared, the crash and thunder has momentarily, but only for the moment, died away.... A miracle of deliverance... is manifest to us all. The enemy was hurled back by the retreating British and French troops. He was so roughly handled that he dared not molest their departure seriously. The Royal Air Force decisively defeated the main []{#part0038.html_page149}strength of the German Air Force and inflicted on them a loss of at least four to one. And the navy, using nearly 1,000 ships of all kinds, carried over 335,000 men, French and British, from the jaws of death back to their native land and to the tasks which lie immediately before them.

We must be very careful not to assign to this deliverance attributes of a victory. Wars are not won by evacuations. But there was a victory inside this deliverance which must be noted.... Can you conceive of a greater objective for the power of Germany in the air than to make all evacuations from these beaches impossible and to sink all of the ships, numbering almost 1,000? Could there have been an incentive of greater military importance and significance to the whole purpose of the war?

They tried hard and were beaten back. They were frustrated in their task; we have got the armies away.... I will pay my tribute to these young airmen. The great French Army was very largely... cast back and disturbed by the onrush of a few thousands of armored vehicles. May it not be that the cause of civilization itself will be defended by the skill and devotion of a few thousand airmen?

There never has been, I suppose, in all the history of the world such opportunity for youth. The Knights of the Round Table and Crusaders have fallen back into distant days, not only distant but prosaic; but these young men are going forth every morning, going forth holding in their hands an instrument of colossal shattering power, of whom it may be said that "every morn brought forth a noble chance and every chance brought forth a noble deed." These young men deserve our gratitude, as all brave men who in so many ways and so many occasions are ready and will continue to be ready to give their life and their all to their native land....

Nevertheless, our thankfulness at the escape of our army with so many men, and the thankfulness of their loved ones, who passed through an agonizing week, must not blind us to the fact that what happened in France and Belgium is a colossal military disaster....

We are told that Hitler has plans for invading the British Isles. This has often been thought of before. When Napoleon lay at Boulogne for a year with his flat-bottomed boats and his Grand Army, someone told him, "There are bitter weeds in England." There are certainly a great many more of them since the British Expeditionary Force returned....

We have found it necessary to take measures of increasing stringency, not only against enemy aliens and suspicious characters of other nationalities but also against British subjects who may become a danger or a nuisance should the war be transported to the United Kingdom. I know there are a great many people affected by the orders which we have []{#part0038.html_page150}made who are passionate enemies of Nazi Germany. I am very sorry for them, but we cannot, under the present circumstances, draw all the distinctions we should like to do. If parachute landings were attempted and fierce fighting attendant on them followed, those unfortunate people would be far better out of the way for their own sake as well as ours.

There is, however, another class for which I feel not the slightest sympathy. Parliament has given us powers to put down fifth column activities with a strong hand, and we shall use those powers subject to the supervision and correction of the House without the slightest hesitation until we are satisfied, and more than satisfied, that this malignancy in our midst has been effectively stamped out.

Turning once again to the question of invasion, there has, I will observe, never been a period in all those long centuries of which we boast when an absolute guarantee against invasion, still less against serious raids, could have been given to our people. In the days of Napoleon the same wind which might have carried his transports across the Channel might have driven away the blockading fleet. There is always the chance, and it is that chance which has excited and befouled the imaginations of many Continental tyrants.

Many are the tales that are told. We are assured that novel methods will be adopted, and when we see the originality of malice, the ingenuity of aggression, which our enemy displays, we may certainly prepare ourselves for every kind of novel stratagem and every kind of brutal and treacherous maneuver. I think no idea is so outlandish that it should not be considered and viewed with a watchful, but at the same time steady, eye....

We shall prove ourselves once again able to defend our island home, ride out the storm of war, outlive the menace of tyranny, if necessary for years, if necessary alone. At any rate, that is what we are going to try to do. That is the resolve of His Majesty's government, every man of them. That is the will of Parliament and the nation. The British Empire and the French Republic, linked together in their cause and their need, will defend to the death their native soils, aiding each other like good comrades to the utmost of their strength, even though a large tract of Europe and many old and famous states have fallen or may fall into the grip of the Gestapo and all the odious apparatus of Nazi rule.

We shall not flag nor fail. We shall go on to the end. We shall fight in France, we shall fight on the seas and oceans, we shall fight with growing confidence and growing strength in the air, we shall defend our island, whatever the cost may be, we shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight []{#part0038.html_page151}on the landing grounds, we shall fight in the fields and in the streets, we shall fight in the hills; we shall never surrender. And even if, which I do not for a moment believe, this island or a large part of it were subjugated and starving, then our Empire beyond the seas, armed and guarded by the British Fleet, will carry on the struggle, until, in God's good time, the New World, with all its power and might, sets forth to the liberation and rescue of the old.

[]{#part0039.html}
