# India's Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru Delivers the Eulogy for Gandhi {#part0059.html_c51 .toc}

::: block
*"In ages to come, centuries and maybe millennia after us, people will think of this generation when this man of God trod on earth.... Let us be worthy of him."*
:::

Known to his loyal Indian followers as the Mahatma (variously translated as "Great Soul" or "Teacher"), Mohandas K. Gandhi spent his lifetime perfecting the techniques of nonviolence and "fasts unto death" to achieve political goals. In 1948, however, he was shot to death by a Hindu extremist who held him responsible for the 1947 partition of India into the nations of India and Pakistan, a partition that Gandhi himself had fought without success.

In the aftermath of Gandhi's assassination, Jawaharlal Nehru, the []{#part0059.html_page224}prime minister of India, stood before the Constituent Assembly in New Delhi to offer a stirring tribute to the dead leader, who had been his lifelong friend. Although their vision of India was not the same---the Mahatma hoped for an agrarian society, Nehru for an industrial nation---the two were united in opposition to British rule.

Nehru's eulogy for Gandhi, delivered on February 2, 1948, makes extended use of poetic language ("A glory has departed") and repetition ("All we know is that there was a glory and that it is no more; all we know is that for the moment there is darkness"). In describing the sadness that pervades India at Gandhi's passing, Nehru acknowledges the widespread feeling of loss and honestly admits, "I do not know when we shall be able to get rid of it." He does, however, offer the consolation of Gandhi's enlightenment; throughout the eulogy, in fact, he stresses the imagery of light and darkness to illuminate the loss of "this man of divine fire."

\*\*\*

**[...A GLORY HAS]{.small}** departed and the sun that warmed and brightened our lives has set, and we shiver in the cold and dark. Yet he would not have us feel this way. After all, that glory that we saw for all these years, that man with the divine fire, changed us also---and such as we are, we have been molded by him during these years; and out of that divine fire many of us also took a small spark which strengthened and made us work to some extent on the lines that he fashioned. And so if we praise him, our words seem rather small, and if we praise him, to some extent we also praise ourselves. Great men and eminent men have monuments in bronze and marble set up for them, but this man of divine fire managed in his lifetime to become enshrined in millions and millions of hearts so that all of us became somewhat of the stuff that he was made of, though to an infinitely lesser degree. He spread out in this way all over India, not in palaces only, or in select places or in assemblies, but in every hamlet and hut of the lowly and those who suffer. He lives in the hearts of millions and he will live for immemorial ages.

What, then, can we say about him except to feel humble on this occasion? To praise him we are not worthy---to praise him whom we could not follow adequately and sufficiently. It is almost doing him an injustice just to pass him by with words when he demanded work and labor and sacrifice from us; in a large measure he made this country, during the last thirty years or more, attain to heights of sacrifice which in that particular domain have never been equaled elsewhere. He succeeded in that. Yet ultimately things happened which no doubt made him suffer []{#part0059.html_page225}tremendously, though his tender face never lost its smile and he never spoke a harsh word to anyone. Yet, he must have suffered---suffered for the failing of this generation whom he had trained, suffered because we went away from the path that he had shown us. And ultimately the hand of a child of his---for he, after all, is as much a child of his as any other Indian---the hand of a child of his struck him down.

Long ages afterwards history will judge of this period that we have passed through. It will judge of the successes and the failures---we are too near it to be proper judges and to understand what has happened and what has not happened. All we know is that there was a glory and that it is no more; all we know is that for the moment there is darkness, not so dark certainly, because when we look into our hearts we still find the living flame which he lighted there. And if those living flames exist, there will not be darkness in this land, and we shall be able, with our effort, remembering him and following his path, to illumine this land again, small as we are, but still with the fire that he instilled into us.

He was perhaps the greatest symbol of the India of the past, and may I say, of the India of the future, that we could have had. We stand on this perilous edge of the present, between that past and the future to be, and we face all manner of perils. And the greatest peril is sometimes the lack of faith which comes to us, the sense of frustration that comes to us, the sinking of the heart and of the spirit that comes to us when we see ideals go overboard, when we see the great things that we talked about somehow pass into empty words, and life taking a different course. Yet, I do believe that perhaps this period will pass soon enough.

He has gone, and all over India there is a feeling of having been left desolate and forlorn. All of us sense that feeling, and I do not know when we shall be able to get rid of it. And yet together with that feeling there is also a feeling of proud thankfulness that it has been given to us of this generation to be associated with this mighty person. In ages to come, centuries and maybe millennia after us, people will think of this generation when this man of God trod on earth, and will think of us who, however small, could also follow his path and tread the holy ground where his feet had been. Let us be worthy of him.

[]{#part0060.html}
