# Lord General Oliver Cromwell Orders the "Rump Parliament" Out of the House {#part0071.html_c62 .toc}

::: block
*"Depart, I say; and let us have done with you. In the name of God---go!"*
:::

In the English civil wars of the seventeenth century, with religious "Roundheads" fighting the royalists behind the absolutist Charles Stuart, a Puritan member of Parliament from Cambridge named Oliver Cromwell emerged as a military leader of genius. His forces defeated the royalists, and Cromwell, in an act remembered as regicide, signed the death warrant that brought about the execution of Charles I in 1649.

Cromwell and his New Model Army purged the Parliament of many of the members he considered disloyal to him, governing with the remainder (called the "Rump Parliament"). But even this reduced group, supposedly an interim legislature, resisted the leader of the Puritan Commonwealth. On April 26, 1653, its members started to pass an act that would []{#part0071.html_page265}perpetuate their power. Cromwell saw this as a threat to his control, and took a company of musketeers with him into the House.

We do not know exactly what he said that day because on January 7, 1659, a year after his death, in an act of historical vandalism, Parliament ordered the official version of his speech expunged from the record. (Two years later, after the Restoration of the monarchy, King Charles II had Cromwell's remains disinterred from Westminster Abbey and his head placed on a pike atop the Hall throughout the king's reign.) A century after that, when the Lord Protector, or dictator, was no longer so widely hated, free-speech advocates who wanted to castigate Parliament for its sedition persecution of the outspoken John Wilkes came up with a spurious version of the Cromwell speech. Here it is; the "shining bauble" referred to at the end was the parliamentary mace, symbol of authority:

"It is high time for me to put an end to your sitting in this place, which you have dishonored by your contempt of all virtue, and defiled by your practice of every vice; ye are a factious crew, and enemies to all good government; ye are a pack of mercenary wretches, and would like Esau sell your country for a mess of pottage, and like Judas betray your God for a few pieces of money; is there a single virtue now remaining amongst you? Is there one vice you do not possess? Ye have no more religion than my horse; gold is your God; which of you have not barter'd your conscience for bribes? Is there a man amongst you that has the least care for the good of the Commonwealth? Ye sordid prostitutes have you not defil'd this sacred place, and turn'd the Lord's temple into a den of thieves, by your immoral principles and wicked practices?

"Ye are grown intolerably odious to the whole nation; you who were deputed here by the people to get grievances redress'd, are yourselves become the greatest grievance. Your country therefore calls upon me to cleanse this Augean stable, by putting a final period to your iniquitous proceedings in this House; and which by God's help, and the strength he has given me, I am now come to do; I command ye therefore, upon the peril of your lives, to depart immediately out of this place; go, get you out! Make haste! Ye venal slaves be gone! Go! Take away that shining bauble there, and lock up the doors. In the name of God, go!"

Close, perhaps, but not wholly authentic. A century after that, the famed English historian Thomas Carlyle pored over three contemporary sources to get as close as he could to what Cromwell actually said. "Combining these originals," he wrote in 1845, "we have, after various perusals and collations and considerations, obtained the following authentic, moderately conceivable account."

[]{#part0071.html_page266}Here is Carlyle's reconstruction in the form of narrative studded with direct quotation. The Lord General was Cromwell; he had not yet promoted himself to Lord Protector. Note the report of Cromwell's "clapping on his hat," the angry general's calculated insult to parliamentary rule. With his company of armed soldiers outside the hall at the ready, the general takes his seat.

\*\*\*

**[WHEREUPON THE LORD]{.small}** General sat still, for about a quarter of an hour longer. But now the question being put, That this Bill do now pass, he beckons again to Harrison, says, "This is the time; I must do it!"---and so rose up, put off his hat, and spake. At the first, and for a good while, he spake to the commendation of the Parliament for their pains and care of the public good; but afterwards he changed his style, told them of their injustice, delays of justice, self-interest, and other faults---rising higher and higher, into a very aggravated style indeed. An honorable Member, Sir Peter Wentworth by name, not known to my readers, and by me better known than trusted, rises to order, as we phrase it; says, "It is a strange language this; unusual within the walls of Parliament this! And from a trusted servant too; and one whom we have so highly honored; and one"---"Come, come!" exclaims my Lord General in a very high key, "we have had enough of this,"---and in fact my Lord General now blazing all up into clear conflagration, exclaims, "I will put an end to your prating," and steps forth into the floor of the House, and clapping on his hat, and occasionally stamping the floor with his feet, begins a discourse:...

"It is not fit that you should sit here any longer! You have sat too long here for any good you have been doing lately. You shall now give place to better men!---Call them in!" adds he briefly, to Harrison, in word of command: and some twenty or thirty grim musketeers enter, with bullets and their snaphances; grimly prompt for orders....

"You call yourselves a Parliament," continues my Lord General in clear blaze of conflagration: "You are no Parliament: I say you are no Parliament! Some of you are drunkards," and his eye flashes on poor Mr. Chaloner, an official man of some value, addicted to the bottle; "some of you are---" and he glares into Harry Marten, and the poor Sir Peter who rose to order, lewd livers both; "living in open contempt of God's Commandments. Following your own greedy appetites, and the Devil's Commandments."

"Corrupt unjust persons; scandalous to the profession of the Gospel; how can you be a Parliament for God's People? Depart, I say; and let us have done with you. In the name of God---go!"

[]{#part0072.html}
