# []{#part0072.html_page267 .calibre4}A Youthful William Pitt the Elder Debates the Merits of Age {#part0072.html_c63 .toc}

::: block
*"I will not sit unconcerned while my liberty is invaded, nor look in silence upon public robbery."*
:::

In 1741, a limit of thirty-five shillings a month was proposed for the wages of sailors, and the discussion of this proposition led the elder William Pitt to demonstrate his eloquence in debate. Born in 1708, Pitt eventually served as prime minister and was known as the Great Commoner. The year that he turned thirty-three, however, his reputation as a debater was secured with his response to the accusation of what he called "the atrocious crime of being a young man."

The speech to which Pitt was replying has been variously attributed to Sir Robert Walpole, prime minister of England from 1721 to 1742, and to his third son, Horace (originally Horatio), statesman and writer. Samuel Johnson's original edition of *Parliamentary Debates*, the source of the debate's text, credits Horatio Walpole, although he was born in 1717, almost ten years after the elder Pitt.

William Pitt's impassioned answer weighs first the difference between age and experience and then the proper language for debate. Through the repeated use of the correlative conjunctions "neither" and "nor," he balances his ideas in parallel structure and turns the attack from "youth" to "age, which always brings one privilege, that of being insolent and supercilious without punishment."

\*\*\*

**[SIR, I WAS]{.small}** unwilling to interrupt the course of this debate while it was carried on with calmness and decency, by men who do not suffer the ardor of opposition to cloud their reason, or transport them to such expressions as the dignity of this assembly does not admit.

I have hitherto deferred to answer the gentleman who declaimed against the bill with such fluency of rhetoric and such vehemence of gesture, who charged the advocates for the expedients now proposed with []{#part0072.html_page268}having no regard to any interest but their own, and with making laws only to consume paper, and threatened them with the defection of their adherents and the loss of their influence upon this new discovery of their folly and their ignorance. Nor, sir, do I now answer him for any other purpose than to remind him how little the clamors of rage and petulancy of invectives contribute to the purposes for which this assembly is called together; how little the discovery of truth is promoted and the security of the nation established by pompous diction and theatrical emotions.

Formidable sounds and furious declamations, confident assertions and lofty periods, may affect the young and inexperienced, and, perhaps, the gentleman may have contracted his habits of oratory by conversing more with those of his own age than with such as have had more opportunities of acquiring knowledge and more successful methods of communicating their sentiments. If the heat of his temper, sir, would suffer him to attend to those whose age and long acquaintance with business give them an indisputable right to deference and superiority, he would learn, in time, to reason rather than declaim and to prefer justness of argument, and an accurate knowledge of facts, to sounding epithets and splendid superlatives, which may disturb the imagination for a moment, but leave no lasting impression on the mind.

He will learn, sir, that to accuse and prove are very different, and that reproaches unsupported by evidence affect only the character of him that utters them. Excursions of fancy and flights of oratory are, indeed, pardonable in young men, but in no other; and it would surely contribute more, even to the purpose for which some gentlemen appear to speak, that of depreciating the conduct of the administration, to prove the inconveniences and injustice of this bill, than barely to assert them, with whatever magnificence of language or appearance of zeal, honesty, or compassion.

\[[PITT]{.small}:\] Sir, the atrocious crime of being a young man, which the honorable gentleman has with such spirit and decency charged upon me, I shall neither attempt to palliate nor deny, but content myself with wishing that I may be one of those whose follies may cease with their youth, and not of that number who are ignorant in spite of experience. Whether youth can be imputed to any man as a reproach, I will not, sir, assume the province of determining; but surely age may become justly contemptible, if the opportunities which it brings have passed away without improvement, and vice appears to prevail when the passions have subsided. The wretch that, after having seen the consequences of a thousand errors, continues still to blunder, and whose age has only added obstinacy to stupidity, is surely the object of either abhorrence or contempt, []{#part0072.html_page269}and deserves not that his gray head should secure him from insults. Much more, sir, is he to be abhorred who, as he has advanced in age, has receded from virtue, and becomes more wicked with less temptation; who prostitutes himself for money which he cannot enjoy, and spends the remains of his life in the ruin of his country. But youth, sir, is not my only crime; I have been accused of acting a theatrical part. A theatrical part may either imply some peculiarities of gesture or a dissimulation of my real sentiments and an adoption of the opinions and language of another man.

In the first sense, sir, the charge is too trifling to be confuted, and deserves only to be mentioned that it may be despised. I am at liberty, like every other man, to use my own language; and though I may, perhaps, have some ambition to please this gentleman, I shall not lay myself under any restraint, nor very solicitously copy his diction or his mien, however matured by age or modeled by experience. If any man shall by charging me with theatrical behavior imply that I utter any sentiments but my own, I shall treat him as a calumniator and a villain; nor shall any protection shelter from the treatment which he deserves. I shall, on such an occasion, without scruple, trample upon all those forms with which wealth and dignity entrench themselves, nor shall anything but age restrain my resentment; age, which always brings one privilege, that of being insolent and supercilious without punishment. But with regard, sir, to those whom I have offended, I am of the opinion that if I had acted a borrowed part, I should have avoided their censure; the heat that offended them is the ardor of conviction, and that zeal for the service of my country which neither hope nor fear shall influence me to suppress. I will not sit unconcerned while my liberty is invaded, nor look in silence upon public robbery....

[]{#part0073.html}
