# Religious Scourge Savonarola Demands Repentance from the Citizens of Florence {#part0111.html_c99 .toc}

::: block
*"To thy tongue say, 'Speak no more evil.'"*
:::

The fiery words of Girolamo Savonarola, the most forceful of Italy's religious reformers in the fifteenth century, led to a "bonfire of the vanities." In those public conflagrations of 1497, devoted followers of Savonarola burned items considered immoral and representative of the gaudy excesses of life in Florence; books, masks, and other "vanities" (trivial or frivolous objects) fueled the religious flames as Savonarola exhorted his listeners to repent and find forgiveness in a new austerity.

Savonarola had begun his formal religious training in the most severe of Dominican orders. Sent to Florence, the cultural center that became the cradle of the Renaissance, he sought to reform what he considered the moral corruption of both church and state. Prophesying divine wrath, Savonarola used biblical allusions and straightforward, unadorned words []{#part0111.html_page465}to denounce the Medici and convey the inevitability of purging that he expected divine wrath to bring.

After charging the pope with having achieved his election through simony, or the corrupt sale of preferments, he was excommunicated in 1497, and a year later he was tried for heresy, with severe cross-examination and torture that supposedly extorted from him a confession of false prophecy. Savonarola was hanged and then burned at the stake.

In his May 12, 1496, sermon on the Feast of the Ascension, Savonarola excoriated the vices and wickedness that he saw everywhere. Especially forceful are the parallel passages that conclude the sermon, as Savonarola instructs followers on addressing their eyes, ears, tongues, and hands as ways to preach to themselves.

\*\*\*

**[IN EVERYTHING AM]{.small}** I oppressed; even the spiritual power is against me with Peter's mighty key. Narrow is my path and full of trouble; like Balaam's ass, I must throw myself on the ground and cry, "See, here I am; I am ready to die for the truth." But when Balaam beat his fallen beast, it said to him, "What have I done to thee?" So I say to you, "Come here and tell me: what have I done to you? Why do you beat me? I have spoken the truth to you; I have warned you to choose a virtuous life; I have led many souls to Christ." But you answer, "Thou hast spoken evil of us, therefore thou shouldst suffer the stripes thou deservest." But I named no one; I only blamed your vices in general. If you have sinned, be angry with yourselves, not with me. I name none of you, but if the sins I have mentioned are without question yours, then they and not I make you known.

As the smitten beast asked Balaam, so I ask you, "Tell me, am I not your ass? And do you not know that I have been obedient to you up to this very moment, that I have even done what my superiors have commanded, and have always behaved myself peaceably?" You know this, and because I am now so entirely different, you may well believe that a great cause drives me to it. Many knew me as I was at first; if I remained so I could have had as much honor as I wanted. I lived six years among you, and now I speak otherwise; nevertheless I announce to you the truth that is well known. You see in what sorrows and what opposition I must now live, and I can say with Jeremiah, "O my mother, that thou hast borne me a man of strife and contention to the whole earth!" But where is a father or a mother that can say I have led their son into sin; []{#part0111.html_page466}one that can say I have ruined her husband or his wife? Everybody knows my manner of life; therefore it is right for you to believe that I speak the truth which everybody knows. You think that it is impossible for a man to do what the faith I have preached tells him to do: with God it would be easy for you.

The ass alone saw the angel; the others did not, so open your eyes. Thank God, many have them open. You have seen many learned men whom you thought wise, and they have withstood our cause: now they believe; many noted masters who were hard and proud against us: now humility casts them down. You have also seen many women turn from their vanity to simplicity; vicious youths who are now improved and conduct themselves in a new way. Many, indeed, have received this doctrine with humility. That doctrine has stood firm, no matter how attacked with the intention of showing that it was a doctrine opposed to Christ. God does that to manifest his wisdom, to show how it finally overcomes all other wisdom. And he is willing that his servants be spoken against that they may show their patience and humility, and for the sake of his love not be afraid of martyrdom.

O ye men and women, I bid you to this truth; let those who are in captivity contradict you as much as they will, God will come and oppose their pride. Ye proud, however, if you do not turn about and become better, then will the sword and the pestilence fall upon you; with famine and war will Italy be turned upside down. I foretell you this because I am sure of it: if I were not, I would not mention it. Open your eyes as Balaam opened his eyes when the angel said to him, "Had it not been for thine ass, I would have slain thee." So I say to you, ye captives, "Had it not been for the good and their preaching, it would have been woe unto you." Balaam said, "If this way is not good, I will return." You say likewise, you would turn back to God, if your way is not good. And to the angel you say as Balaam said, "What wilt thou that we should do?" The angel answers thee as he answered Balaam, "Thou shalt not curse this people, but shalt say what I put in thy mouth." But in thy mouth he puts the warning that thou shouldst do good, convince one another of the divine truth, and bear evil manfully. For it is the life of a Christian to do good and to bear wrong and to continue steadfast unto death, and this is the Gospel, which we, according to the text of the Gospel for today, shall preach in all the world.

"What wilt thou have of us, brother?" you ask. I desire that you serve Christ with zeal and not with sloth and indifference. I desire that you do not mourn, but in thankfulness raise your hands to heaven, whenever your brother or your son enters the service of Christ. The time is come []{#part0111.html_page467}when Christ will work not only in you but through you and in others; whoever hears, let him say, "Come, brother." Let one draw the other. Turn about, thou who thinkest that thou art of a superior mind and therefore canst not accept the faith. If I could only explain this whole Gospel to thee word for word, I would then scourge thy forehead and prove to thee that the faith could not be false and that Christ is thy God who is enthroned in heaven, and waits for thee. Or dost thou believe? Where are thy works? Why dost thou delay about them?

Hear this: There was once a monk who spoke to a distinguished man about the faith and got him to answer why he did not believe. He answered thus: "You yourself do not believe, for if you believed you would show other works." Therefore, to you also I say, If you believe, where are your works? Your faith is something everyone knows, for everyone knows that Christ was put to death by the Jews, and that everywhere men pray to him. The whole world knows that his glory has not been spread by force and weapons but by poor fishermen. O wise man, do you think the poor fishermen were not clever enough for this? Where they worked, there they made hearts better; where they could not work, there men remained bad; and therefore was the faith true and from God. The signs which the Lord had promised followed their teaching: in his name they drove out the devil; they spoke in new tongues; if they drank any deadly drink, they received therefrom no harm. Even if these wonders had not occurred, there would have been the wonder of wonders, that poor fishermen without any miracle could accomplish so great a work as the faith. It came from God, and so is Christ true and Christ is thy God, who is in heaven and awaits thee.

You say you believe the Gospel. but you do not believe me. But the purer anything is, so much the nearer it stands to its end and purpose. The Christian life purifies the heart and places it very near to the truth. To the Christian life will I lead you, if you would have the knowledge of the truth. If I had wished to deceive you, why should I have given you as the chief of my gifts the means of discovering my fraud? I would be verily a fool to try to impose upon you with a falsehood which you would soon detect; only because I offered you the truth, did I call you. Come here, I fear you not; the closer you examine, the clearer the truth will become to you.

There are some, however, who are ashamed of the cross of Jesus Christ, and say, "If we should believe that, we should be despised everywhere, especially by the wisest." But if you would know the truth, look only on the lives of those who would have to cry woe on their unbelief if they should be measured by deeds. If you are ashamed of the cross, the []{#part0111.html_page468}Lord was not ashamed to bear that cross for you, and to die on that cross for you. Be not ashamed of his service and of the defense of the truth. Look at the servants of the devil who are not ashamed in the open places, in the palaces, and everywhere to speak evil and to revile us. Bear then a little shame only for your Lord; for whoever follows him will, according to our Gospel, in his name drive out the devil; that is, he will drive out his sins and lead a virtuous life; he will drive out serpents; he will throw out the lazy who come into the houses, and say evil things under the pretense of righteousness, and so are like poisonous serpents. You will see how children can withstand them with the truth of God and drive them away. If a believer drinks anything deadly it will not hurt him: this deadly drink is the false doctrines of the lazy, from whom, as you contend with them, a little comes also to you. But he who stands unharmed in the faith, cries to you, "See that you do good; seek God's glory, not your own." He that does that is of the truth, and remains unharmed. The Lord says further of the faithful, "They shall lay their hands on the sick and shall heal them." The hands are the works, and the good lay such hands on the weak that they may support them when they totter. Do I not teach you according to the Gospel? Why do you hesitate and go not into the service of the Lord? Do you ask me still what you ought to do? I will, in conclusion, tell you.

Look to Christ, and you will find that all he says concerns faith. Ask the Apostle; he speaks of nothing else than of faith. If you have the ground of all, if you have faith, you will always do what is good. Without faith man always falls into sin. You must seek faith in order to be good, or else your faith will become false. Christ commanded his disciples to preach the Gospel to all the world, and your wise men call a man a little world, a microcosm. So then, preach to yourself, O man, woman, and child. Three parts the world has in you also. Preach first of all to your knowledge, and say to it, "If you draw near this truth, you will have much faith; wherefore do you hesitate to use it?" To your will, say, "Thou seest that everything passes away; therefore love not the world, love Christ." Thereupon turn to the second part of your world, and say to it, "Be thankful, O my memory, for the mercies God has shown thee, that thou thinkest not of the things of this world but of the mercy of thy creation, and thy redemption through the blood of the Son of God." Then go to the third part, to thy imagination, and proclaim to it, "Set nothing before my eyes but my death, bring nothing before me but the Crucified, embrace him, fly to him." Then go through all the cities of thy world, and preach to them.

First say to thine eyes, "Look not on vanity." To thy ears say, "Listen []{#part0111.html_page469}not to the words of the lazy, but only to the words of Jesus." To thy tongue say, "Speak no more evil." For thy tongue is as a great rock that rolls from the summit of a mountain, and at first falls slowly, then ever faster and more furiously. It begins with gentle murmuring, then it utters small sins, and then greater, until it finally breaks forth in open blasphemy. To thy palate say, "It is necessary that we do a little penance." In all thy senses be clean, and turn to the Lord, for he it is who will give you correction and purity. To thy hands say, "Do good and give alms"; and let thy feet go in the good way.

Our reformation has begun in the Spirit of God, if you take it to heart that each one has to preach to himself. Then will we in the name of Jesus drive out the devils of temptation. Yes, call upon Jesus as often as temptation approaches: call upon him a hundred times and believe firmly, and the temptation will depart. Then will we speak with new tongues; we will speak with God. We shall drive away serpents; the enticement of the senses are these serpents. If we drink anything deadly, it will not hurt us; if anger and lust arise in us, at the name of Jesus they will have to give way. We shall lay our hands upon the sick and heal them; with good deeds shall we strengthen the weak soul. If thou feelest thy weakness, flee to God, and he will strengthen; therefore he is thy only refuge. He is thy Savior and thy Lord, who went into the heavens to prepare a place for thee, and to wait thee there. What do you intend to do? Go and follow Jesus, who is praised from everlasting to everlasting. Amen.

[]{#part0112.html}
