# Clergyman John Witherspoon Couples Religion with Politics {#part0115.html_c103 .toc}

::: block
*"Whoever is an avowed enemy to God, I scruple not to call him an enemy to his country."*
:::

The only clergyman to sign the declaration of independence, Reverend John Witherspoon was a Scottish Presbyterian who in 1768 came to America to serve as president of the College of New-Jersey, now known as Princeton. Within a decade of his arrival, however, he was as actively involved in the political struggles of the colonies as in education.

In May 1776, Witherspoon caused controversy in preaching "The []{#part0115.html_page480}Dominion of Providence over the Passions of Men" in Princeton. This stern sermon, which was his first to discuss politics, preceded by a month his election to the Continental Congress and signaled the outspokenness of his political stance. When he was told that America was not ripe for independence, Witherspoon was said to have answered, "In my judgment, sir, we are not only ripe but rotting."

Witherspoon's sermon uses various rhetorical devices in urging that liberty is a religious as well as a political issue. Among these devices are the rhetorical question ("Would any man who could prevent it give up his estate, person, and family to the disposal of his neighbor...?") and parrhesia, or apologizing for what follows ("Pardon me, my brethren, for insisting so much upon this"). The sermon concludes with what may be considered his central theme---"that in America true religion and civil liberty may be inseparable."

\*\*\*

**[THERE IS NOT]{.small}** a greater evidence either of the reality or the power of religion than a firm belief of God's universal presence, and a constant attention to the influence and operation of his Providence. It is by this means that the Christian may be said, in the emphatical Scripture language, "to walk with God, and to endure as seeing him who is invisible."

The doctrine of divine Providence is very full and complete in the sacred oracles. It extends not only to things which we may think of great moment, and therefore worthy of notice, but to things the most indifferent and inconsiderable; "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing," says our Lord, "and one of them falleth not to the ground without your heavenly Father"; nay, "the very hairs of your head are all numbered." It extends not only to things beneficial and salutary, or to the direction and assistance of those who are the servants of the living God, but to things seemingly most hurtful and destructive, and to persons the most refractory and disobedient. He overrules all his creatures, and all their actions.

Thus we are told that "fire, hail, snow, vapor, and stormy wind, fulfill his word," in the course of nature; and even so the most impetuous and disorderly passions of men, that are under no restraint from themselves, are yet perfectly subject to the dominion of Jehovah. They carry his commission, they obey his orders, they are limited and restrained by his authority, and they conspire with everything else in promoting his glory. There is the greater need to take notice of this, that men are not generally []{#part0115.html_page481}sufficiently aware of the distinction between the law of God and his purpose; they are apt to suppose that as the temper of the sinner is contrary to the one, so the outrages of the sinner are able to defeat the other; than which nothing can be more false. The truth is plainly asserted and nobly expressed by the psalmist in the text "Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee; the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain."

This psalm was evidently composed as a song of praise for some signal victory obtained....

I am sensible, my brethren, that the time and occasion of this psalm may seem to be in one respect ill suited to the interesting circumstances of this country at present. It was composed after the victory was obtained; whereas we are now but putting on the harness and entering upon an important contest, the length of which it is impossible to foresee. and the issue of which it will perhaps be thought presumption to foretell....

The truth, then, asserted in this text, which I propose to illustrate and improve, is that all the disorderly passions of men, whether exposing the innocent to private injury, or whether they are the arrows of divine judgment in public calamity, shall, in the end, be to the praise of God: or, to apply it more particularly to the present state of the American colonies, and the plague of war, the ambition of mistaken princes, the cunning and cruelty of oppressive and corrupt ministers, and even the inhumanity of brutal soldiers, however dreadful, shall finally promote the glory of God, and in the meantime, while the storm continues, his mercy and kindness shall appear in prescribing bounds to their rage and fury.

In discoursing on this subject, it is my intention, through the assistance of divine grace,

:::: block1
::: calibre2
I. To point out to you in some particulars, how the wrath of man praises God.

II\. To apply these principles to our present situation, by inferences of truth for your instruction and comfort, and by suitable exhortations to duty in the important crisis.
:::
::::

In the first place, I am to point out to you in some particulars, how the wrath of man praises God. I say in some instances, because it is far from being in my power either to mention or explain the whole. There is an unsearchable depth in the divine counsels, which it is impossible for us to penetrate. It is the duty of every good man to place the most unlimited []{#part0115.html_page482}confidence in divine wisdom, and to believe that those measures of Providence that are most unintelligible to him are yet planned with the same skill, and directed to the same great purposes, as others, the reason and tendency of which he can explain in the clearest manner. But where revelation and experience enables us to discover the wisdom, equity, or mercy of divine Providence, nothing can be more delightful or profitable to a serious mind, and therefore I beg your attention to the following remarks.

In the first place, the wrath of man praises God, as it is an example and illustration of divine truth, and clearly points out the corruption of our nature, which is the foundation stone of the doctrine of redemption. Nothing can be more absolutely necessary to true religion than a clear and full conviction of the sinfulness of our nature and state. Without this there can be neither repentance in the sinner nor humility in the believer. Without this all that is said in Scripture of the wisdom and mercy of God in providing a Savior, is without force and without meaning....

It would be a criminal inattention not to observe the singular interposition of Providence hitherto, in behalf of the American colonies. It is, however, impossible for me, in a single discourse, as well as improper at this time, to go through every step of our past transactions. I must therefore content myself with a few remarks. How many discoveries have been made of the designs of enemies in Britain and among ourselves, in a manner as unexpected to us as to them, and in such season as to prevent their effect? What surprising success has attended our encounters in almost every instance? Has not the boasted discipline of regular and veteran soldiers been turned into confusion and dismay, before the new and maiden courage of freemen, in defense of their property and right? In what great mercy has blood been spared on the side of this injured country?

Some important victories in the South have been gained with so little loss that enemies will probably think it has been dissembled; as many, even of ourselves thought, till time rendered it undeniable. But these were comparatively of small moment. The signal advantage we have gained by the evacuation of Boston, and the shameful flight of the army and navy of Britain, was brought about without the loss of a man. To all this we may add that the counsels of our enemies have been visibly confounded, so that I believe that I may say with truth that there is hardly any step which they have taken, but it has operated strongly against themselves, and been more in our favor than if they had followed a contrary course.

While we give praise to God, the supreme disposer of all events, for his interposition in our behalf, let us guard against the dangerous error of trusting in, or boasting of, an arm of flesh. I could earnestly wish that []{#part0115.html_page483}while our arms are crowned with success, we might content ourselves with a modest ascription of it to the power of the Highest. It has given me great uneasiness to read some ostentatious, vaunting expressions in our newspapers, though happily I think, much restrained of late. Let us not return to them again.

If I am not mistaken, not only the holy Scriptures in general, and the truths of the glorious Gospel in particular, but the whole course of Providence, seem intended to abase the pride of man and lay the vainglorious in the dust. How many instances does history furnish us with, of those who, after exulting over and despising their enemies, were signally and shamefully defeated. The truth is, I believe, the remark may be applied universally, and we may say that through the whole frame of nature, and the whole system of human life, that which promises most performs the least. The flowers of finest color seldom have the sweetest fragrance. The trees of quickest growth or fairest form are seldom of the greatest value or duration. Deep waters move with least noise. Men who think most are seldom talkative. And I think it holds as much in war as in anything that every boaster is a coward.

Pardon me, my brethren, for insisting so much upon this, which may seem but an immaterial circumstance. It is in my opinion of very great moment. I look upon ostentation and confidence to be a sort of outrage upon Providence, and when it becomes general and infuses itself into the spirit of a people, it is a forerunner of destruction....

You shall not, my brethren, hear from me in the pulpit what you have never heard from me in conversation, I mean railing at the king personally, or even his ministers and the Parliament, and people of Britain, as so many barbarous savages. Many of their actions have probably been worse than their intentions. That they should desire unlimited dominion, if they can obtain or preserve it, is neither new nor wonderful. I do not refuse submission to their unjust claims, because they are corrupt or profligate, although probably many of them are so, but because they are men, and therefore liable to all the selfish bias inseparable from human nature. I call this claim unjust, of making laws to bind us in all cases whatsoever, because they are separated from us, independent of us, and have an interest in opposing us.

Would any man who could prevent it give up his estate, person, and family to the disposal of his neighbor, although he had liberty to choose the wisest and the best master? Surely not. This is the true and proper hinge of the controversy between Great Britain and America....

If your principles are pure---the meaning of this is, if your present opposition to the claims of the British ministry does not arise from a seditious []{#part0115.html_page484}and turbulent spirit, or a wanton contempt of legal authority; from a blind and factious attachment to particular persons or parties; or from a selfish rapacious disposition, and a desire to turn public confusion to private profit---but from a concern for the interest of your country, and the safety of yourselves and your posterity. On this subject I cannot help observing that though it would be a miracle if there were not many selfish persons among us, and discoveries now and then made of mean and interested transactions, yet they have been comparatively inconsiderable both in number and effect. In general, there has been so great a degree of public spirit that we have much more reason to be thankful for its vigor and prevalence than to wonder at the few appearances of dishonesty or disaffection. It would be very uncandid to ascribe the universal ardor that has prevailed among all ranks of men, and the spirited exertions in the most distant colonies, to anything else than public spirit. Nor was there ever perhaps in history so general a commotion from which religious differences have been so entirely excluded....

What follows from this? That he is the best friend to American liberty who is most sincere and active in promoting true and undefiled religion, and who sets himself with the greatest firmness to bear down profanity and immorality of every kind. Whoever is an avowed enemy to God, I scruple not to call him an enemy to his country. Do not suppose, my brethren, that I mean to recommend a furious and angry zeal for the circumstantials of religion, or the contentions of one sect with another about their peculiar distinctions. I do not wish you to oppose anybody's religion, but everybody's wickedness. Perhaps there are few surer marks of the reality of religion than when a man feels himself more joined in spirit to a true holy person of a different denomination than to an irregular liver of his own. It is therefore your duty in this important and critical season to exert yourselves, everyone in his proper sphere, to stem the tide of prevailing vice, to promote the knowledge of God, the reverence of his name and worship, and obedience to his laws.

Perhaps you will ask what it is that you are called to do for this purpose farther than your own personal duty. I answer this itself when taken in its proper extent is not a little. The nature and obligation of visible religion is, I am afraid, little understood and less attended to....

Upon the whole, I beseech you to make a wise improvement of the present threatening aspect of public affairs, and to remember that your duty to God, to your country, to your families, and to yourselves is the same. True religion is nothing else but an inward temper and outward conduct suited to your state and circumstances in Providence at any time. And as peace with God, and conformity to him, adds to the sweetness []{#part0115.html_page485}of created comforts while we possess them, so in times of difficulty and trial, it is in the man of piety and inward principle that we may expect to find the uncorrupted patriot, the useful citizen, and the invincible soldier. God grant that in America true religion and civil liberty may be inseparable, and that the unjust attempts to destroy the one may in the issue tend to the support and establishment of both.

[]{#part0116.html}
