# Lincoln, in His Second Inaugural, Seeks to Heal the Spiritual Wounds of War {#part0118.html_c106 .toc}

::: block
*"With malice toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in the right as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in... to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations."*
:::

On March 4, 1865, the Civil War was thirty-seven days from its end. Lincoln, having incorporated the abstract cause of preserving the Union and majority rule into the more rallying cause of human freedom, used his second inaugural to preach a sermon looking past the war's bitterness to a time of what he felt had to be reconciliation and reconstruction.

He raises a Joban question in this most religiously philosophical of []{#part0118.html_page494}inaugural addresses: Why did God put this nation through such terrible punishment? Could God have a different purpose from that supposed to be right by man? Lincoln's suggested answer: God's purpose is part of some unknown and unknowable design; "the Almighty has his own purposes." He cites the Gospel according to Saint Matthew (18:7), quoting Jesus' warning of fearsome retribution to those who harm his believing children: "Woe unto the world because of offenses! for it must needs be that offenses come; but woe to that man by whom the offense cometh!" Lincoln reasons that the offense, or temptation to sin, to the innocent children was slavery, and that the people of both North and South were those by whom that offense of slavery came; therefore, Lincoln asks rhetorically, are we to question God's justice? No; even if that justice means that "every drop of blood drawn with the lash shall be paid by another drawn with the sword," we must accept the justice hailed in the Psalm of David (19:9); "the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether."

Lincoln (unlike Job) bids his countrymen accept the punishment as evidence that great offense was committed and for expiation thereof, which gives them "firmness in the right as God gives us to see the right"---which is only a limited and imperfect vision, but which includes God's justice in "a just and lasting peace." Lincoln's final, unifying touch is to say this peace comes not *between* the warring regions but *among* ourselves, as American individuals, and, looking beyond civil war, "with all nations."

Lincoln wrote later of his second inaugural and its theme of the inscrutability of God's seeming injustice, "I expect it to wear as well as, perhaps better than, any thing I have produced; but I believe it is not immediately popular. Men are not flattered by being shown that there has been a difference of purpose between the Almighty and them. To deny it, however, in this case, is to deny that there is a God governing the world."

\*\*\*

**[FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:]{.small}**

At this second appearing to take the oath of the presidential office there is less occasion for an extended address than there was at the first. Then a statement, somewhat in detail, of a course to be pursued seemed fitting and proper. Now, at the expiration of four years, during which public declarations have been constantly called forth on every point and phase of the great contest which still absorbs the attention and engrosses the energies of the nation, little that is new could be presented. The progress of our arms, upon which all else chiefly depends, is as well known to the public as to []{#part0118.html_page495}myself, and it is, I trust, reasonably satisfactory and encouraging to all. With high hope for the future, no prediction in regard to it is ventured.

On the occasion corresponding to this four years ago all thoughts were anxiously directed to an impending civil war. All dreaded it; all sought to avert it. While the inaugural address was being delivered from this place, devoted altogether to *saving* the Union without war, insurgent agents were in the city seeking to *destroy* it without war---seeking to dissolve the Union and divide effects by negotiation. Both parties deprecated war, but one of them would *make* war rather than let the nation survive, and the other would *accept* war rather than let it perish, and the war came.

One-eighth of the whole population were colored slaves, not distributed generally over the Union, but localized in the southern part of it. These slaves constituted a peculiar and powerful interest. All knew that this interest was somehow the cause of war. To strengthen, perpetuate, and extend this interest was the object for which the insurgents would rend the Union even by war, while the government claimed no right to do more than to restrict the territorial enlargement of it. Neither party expected for the war the magnitude or the duration which it has already attained. Neither anticipated that the *cause* of the conflict might cease with or even before the conflict itself should cease. Each looked for an easier triumph. and a result less fundamental and astounding. Both read the same Bible and pray to the same God, and each invokes his aid against the other. It may seem strange that any men should dare to ask a just God's assistance in wringing their bread from the sweat of other men's faces, but let us judge not, that we be not judged. The prayers of both could not be answered. That of neither has been answered fully. The Almighty has his own purposes. "Woe unto the world because of offenses; for it must needs be that offenses come, but woe to that man by whom the offense cometh." If we shall suppose that American slavery is one of those offenses which, in the providence of God, must needs come, but which, having continued through his appointed time, he now wills to remove, and that he gives to both North and South this terrible war as the woe due to those by whom the offense came, shall we discern therein any departure from those divine attributes which the believers in a living God always ascribe to him? Fondly do we hope, fervently do we pray, that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away. Yet, if God wills that it continue until all the wealth piled by the bondsman's two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk, and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash shall be paid by another drawn with the sword, as was said three thousand years ago, so still it must be said "the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether."

[]{#part0118.html_page496}With malice toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in the right as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in, to bind up the nation's wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and his orphan, to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations.

[]{#part0119.html}
