# []{#part0122.html_page511 .calibre4}Rabbi Louis Finkelstein Delivers a Sermon in the White House {#part0122.html_c110 .toc}

::: block
*"'You must leave a little bit to God.'"*
:::

Cincinnati-born Louis Finkelstein studied for the rabbinate at the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York, taught Hebrew theology and the study of the Talmud, and was elected chancellor of that center of Jewish learning in 1951. Until his death in 1991, he was widely regarded as the preeminent voice of Conservative Judaism in America.

In a 1958 address to a rabbinical assembly, he spoke of a series of conversations that Roman emperor Hadrian had in the year 130 with a Jewish sage named Y'Hoshua Ben Chananyah. "Under Hadrian's rule, Rome had reached the zenith of its power," recounted Dr. Finkelstein. "Yet Y'Hoshua Ben Chananyah, who had keen eyes and was a great sage, foresaw the time, not far off, when this empire would be a great ruin. It couldn't help but be a great ruin, because it was surrounded by enemies and its own citizens did not want to be soldiers. The only way to survive was to take barbarians, as they called them, and train them to be soldiers to hold back the other barbarians, and then it was only a question of time before these barbarians would go over to their brother barbarians and attack Rome, which actually happened within 250 years."

"He was trying to say to the Roman emperor," the rabbi speculated, "that the future peace of the world, the very survival of Roman civilization, depended on a shift in policy---that they had come to the end of what could be done with arms. There was no more land that could be conquered, and all future battles would have to be either stalemates or defeats. Therefore he believed that Rome had to bring to its policy a new idea, the idea of brotherhood with the Parthians and the Saxons and the other tribes.

"Reb Y'Hoshua Ben Chananyah urged the emperor not to arm the barbarians, not to give them technical knowledge which ultimately they would use to destroy Rome, but to give them instead an understanding of what life is all about, which the Jews were trying to spread in the world....

[]{#part0122.html_page512}"The emperor could not accept this, because in order to accept it he would have had to change not Roman policy but Roman character. He would have had to persuade the Roman people not to look upon the barbarians as barbarians, but to look upon them as brothers; to give up their own high standard of living in order to lift the so-called barbarians from their savage ways, and that the Romans were unwilling to do. If they could have done it, Rome could have survived to this day." Rabbi Finkelstein then gave the bridge---"We are living in a world in which the white race is a corporate Hadrian"---that carried his argument to the need for education and an end to racial discrimination.

When President Richard Nixon instituted a series of sermons to be delivered on Sunday mornings in the East Room of the White House, some of his aides felt uncomfortable at possible sectarianism as well as a breach between church and state. "Get the top rabbi," he directed; Dr. Finkelstein agreed to come and, on June 29, 1969, delivered this sermon. (According to his nephew David Finn, Dr. Finkelstein added impromptu comments, specifically on the creation of the State of Israel, to his prepared sermon.)

\*\*\*

**[MR. PRESIDENT, MRS.]{.small}** Nixon, Mr. Chief Justice, Mrs. Burger, ladies, and gentlemen:

One is frequently asked to define the American way of life, which we struggle so hard to protect and develop. No satisfactory definition describes this way of life to those who have not experienced it. However, there are scenes, distinctive of America, scarcely occurring anywhere else, even in the free world, which may help to make it understood. One is taking place in this room today. Here are gathered leaders of our nation, among others, to pray together, uniting across differences of background and doctrine, before the throne of the Judge of us all. Here the assembly looks to a faith, long subject to disdain, and even persecution, for light to our severely tried generation.

In the face of crisis which seemed insoluble, my great predecessor Solomon Schechter used to say, "You must leave a little bit to God." He did not mean that we are free from responsibility to alleviate human agony. He tried to express in a single aphorism the insight of Rabbi Tarfon, a sage who flourished in Judea toward the end of the first century, and who taught his disciples, "You are not obliged to complete the task (that is, the task of making the world a better dwelling-place), but neither are you free []{#part0122.html_page513}to desist from it." Or, as he put it on another occasion, "Do not flinch from a task which by its nature can never be completed."

How little the mightiest of us can hope to accomplish, and how much we have to leave to God! And how secure we may be that, no matter what follies we may commit, he will ultimately save us from the worst results of our errors! After all, here we are, all sentient human beings, yet all descended from primeval bits of protoplasm, themselves incredibly combined from inanimate bits of protein. Perhaps some three billion years were required for those primeval cells to become thinking men and women; but that is surely a brief span for a bacterium to graduate into manhood.

The primeval cells had no notion of purpose. Neither did the earthworms, who, in the course of eons, began the adventuresome roads to mammals, primates, and humans, impelled by a force which still eludes our understanding. Heirs to all their strengths and weaknesses, we are their direct descendants, thinking, writing, speaking, speculating, planning, and even from time to time communing with God himself.

Having brought us so far, did this cosmic force desert us, simply because we are sentient human beings, rather than unicellular bacteria and amoebae? Instead, must we not rationally assume that---privileged to think, to have purpose, to work toward goals---the divine power that brought us from such humble origins will continue to guide us, turning our very folly into wisdom?

As men, we alone among animal species have the power to envisage the future and to choose. We can act wisely, and we can also act foolishly. The machinery which constantly saves us from our sins of omission and commission appears most clearly perhaps in the life of society. American history could properly be told in the style of the Book of Judges. Whenever self-induced danger threatened, leaders have been sent to save our country for its intended destiny of service.

Where would we be today, where would be the hope of the free world, where would be the future of civilization, if in the crises at the beginning of the Republic it had lacked the redoubtable figures of Benjamin Franklin, George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and Alexander Hamilton, to mention only a few? That great tragedy the War between the States arose from many failures of human judgment. But---remarkably---the compassion and wisdom of Abraham Lincoln became available just when they were most essential. Where would the Western world (including our own country) have been today, if Winston Churchill had not, through what seemed at the time mere chance, become the articulate leader of Britain, standing []{#part0122.html_page514}alone between impending barbarism and civilization, guarding us, until we could protect ourselves and others?

Miracles occur not only in historical crises; they are happening every day, all the time, for each of us. Everyone in this room is alive due to uncounted miracles, as commonplace as the rising and setting of the sun.

A student at our seminary once asked whether I really believe in the miracle of the ancient Israelites crossing the Red Sea. (Actually, properly interpreted, Scripture says that they crossed not the Red Sea but a "Sea of Reeds," which may have been a smaller body of water.) As related in Exodus, the story is about as remarkable as the American defeat of the Japanese navy at Midway, a turning point in the Second World War. I might have mentioned this fact. I might also have mentioned the miracle of the American Constitution, a document drawn up by human beings, but which seems to reflect almost divine wisdom, which has guided us for generations and become a model for many other peoples. I might have mentioned the miracle of the Second World War, during which, in 1940, the Allies seemed hopelessly defeated, and yet emerged victorious in 1945. As he was himself a refugee from oppression, who had fled to Jerusalem before coming to the United States, I might have come very near his own experience by mentioning the miracle of the emergence of the state of Israel, an event unique in the annals of mankind.

However, all these answers only occurred to me on my way home from the seminary. My answer to him was different. I said, "I was not present at the crossing of the Red Sea, so that I cannot add to what is recorded. But I certainly believe in miracles; and one of the miracles in which I most firmly believe is that you and I exist, and that despite the fact that our lives are in dire jeopardy momentarily, and would cease if everything depended on our conscious thought." I recommended that he read a book by Walter B. Cannon, professor of physiology at Harvard, called *The Wisdom of the Body*. It is learned and wise; though doubtless since its appearance early in the century, others have superseded some of its facts. Professor Cannon shows what miracles go on at every moment within us; what ingenuity beyond the power of the cleverest engineer enables the eye to see, the ear to hear, the hand to touch, and above all the mind to think. How strange it is that no matter how much liquid we drink, our blood never becomes diluted, but is kept in proper balance! How incredible that the single cell from which each of us developed should carry the potential of every quality destined to appear in us, in its proper season; that the cells multiplying from this original one should have separate functions, one becoming a brain cell, another a red blood corpuscle, a third a bone cell---without confusion or error!

[]{#part0122.html_page515}Of course, sometimes the miraculous is obscured. There is much that is imperfect in man's life, both individual and communal. That is what we should expect. Why should it be otherwise? What needs explanation is how much happens to be right, even though the world in each of its parts is far too complex for the wisest of us to comprehend.

Once more, as Solomon Schechter said, "You must leave a little bit to God." He has been; he is; he will be. We must try to do what we can, and are enjoying a great privilege when we do well and find the path of the right. At such times, we are cooperating with God: in the rabbinic phrase, we become his partners. And he is working through us, and with us. Happy is he, who, like Lincoln, is privileged to save his fellows when they are threatened by their own misdeeds, whose life represents an intervention of the divine into human affairs.

The faith that all will be well enables us to be steadfast in peril, and modest in success; to escape foolish hand-wringing and paralysis, as well as thoughtless panic and fear.

Once more, as Schechter said, "You must leave a little bit to God." I hope that it is not presumptuous for me, a guest of the president of the United States, to pray that, looking back at our generation, a future historian may say, as I have said of Lincoln, "In a period of great trials and tribulations, the finger of God pointed to Richard Milhous Nixon, giving him the wisdom and the vision to save the world and civilization, opening the way for our country to realize the good that the twentieth century offered mankind."

[]{#part0123.html}
