# []{#part0178.html_page823 .calibre4}Radio and Television Journalist Daniel Schorr, at Seventy-five, Makes a Few "Confessions" {#part0178.html_c162 .toc}

::: block
*"The older I get, the more I begin to realize that life isn't that simplicity of the young reporter saying, 'Out of my way, Bud, I want that story, and if I get that story, there it goes.' I have a greater and greater sense of complications."*
:::

Dan Schorr became famous as a CBS television correspondent, a member of the team Edward R. Murrow assembled, which is remembered by broadcast journalists with the awe that Yankee fans show in recalling their "Murderers' Row." Schorr was never a go-along, get-along type, even within his company: his uncompromising integrity led to clashes with CBS boss William Paley and later with CNN boss Ted Turner. What he called his "inescapable decision of journalistic conscience" led him to broadcast and publish a report by the House Intelligence Committee that the House had voted to suppress; in a dramatic confrontation that affected press freedom in Washington, he faced down the irate committee, which decided not to pursue him for contempt of Congress.

On October 3, 1991, in celebration of his seventy-fifth birthday a month before, National Public Radio---proud to have him as its senior commentator---gave a party at the Smithsonian Institution's "castle." To an audience of politicians, friends, and fellow journalists, Schorr proceeded to reminisce, as if off the cuff; as the structure of the speech shows, however, the extemporaneous remarks were thought through in advance. The combination of a startling fact about his early career and a surprising ambivalence about what seemed to be such clear-cut judgments in his later career gripped the audience; it was one of those speeches, excerpted here from a transcript of the tape, that offer food for thought to both sources and broadcasters long after it is delivered.

\*\*\*

[]{#part0178.html_page824}**[...LET ME MAKE]{.small}** to you a couple of confessions, and maybe you'll learn a little bit about how I view a profession that is very, very dear to me, but part of an industry about which I've learned to have a great many reservations.

First confession: I actually never really intended to go into broadcasting at all. All my young life what I wanted was to be a newspaper reporter, especially a foreign correspondent, and most especially, a correspondent for the *New York Times*. Back in the very early 1950s, I was a stringer for the *New York Times*, in Holland, writing assiduously. Finally, I went to New York and said, "You know, I really want to be a staff correspondent for the *New York Times*." The managing editor asked me to go through a trial period in New York to see whether I could cover local news as well as foreign news, and I did. Finally he said, "Go back to Holland. I think we're going to do it. It'll take a few weeks, maybe a couple of months, and then we'll appoint you to our staff."

Time passed, and I wasn't appointed to the staff. In the midst of my waiting, there came this cable from this man, Edward R. Murrow, of CBS, for which I had done a few broadcasts. A cable I can remember as though it were yesterday. It said, "Would you at all consider joining the staff of CBS News with an initial assignment in Washington?"

Flattered though I was to be asked, I thought, well, this is radio, television. This is entertainment stuff. This isn't really for me. So I sent a cable to the *Times*, to Turner Catledge, the managing editor, and said I was wondering when this appointment was going to take place, because I'd had another offer, which I might have difficulty refusing unless we could sort of settle a date. And, to my surprise, a cable came back saying, "We suggest you take this other offer."

So I said okay. And I joined the staff of CBS. A year or so later, visiting New York, I was invited to dinner by two editors of the *New York Times*: Emanuel Friedman, the foreign editor, and Ted Bernstein. assistant managing editor. They said they had a confession to make to me. "You probably wonder why you didn't get the job on the *Times* that was promised to you." And I said yes, in fact, I did wonder what had happened there. "Well, it's been weighing heavily on our consciences, and we've decided to tell you. What happened was that, just about the time you were to be appointed, the *Times* decided to freeze the hiring of Jews because, in case it became necessary to cover a Middle Eastern war, they had too many Jewish correspondents. That freeze lasted about six months, and during that time, your appointment came up. That is why you were not appointed to the *New York Times*."

And so that was how my career was shaped....

[]{#part0178.html_page825}That leads to my second confession. Having looked with the disdain that real newspaper people had for this entertainment thing called radio and television, I began to enjoy it in part. And that bothered me. I recall asking a CBS producer for advice. I said, "Tell me, I can write a story, all right, but what is the secret of success for a journalist in television? I mean, how do you do it on television to make it work?" And he said, "The secret of success in television is sincerity. If you can fake that, you've got it made...."

But I haven't told you my gravest confession of all. You will understand that I have the reporter's ethic---perhaps mystique---that I cannot stand in the way of information getting to the public. People can keep secrets, and, certainly, governments. But once I know, it's not a secret any more. And then I cannot be the arbiter of what the public is allowed to know. In principle, I do not suppress news.

On one occasion, during Watergate, when I was getting a lot of exposure on CBS, a taxi driver taking me to the airport in New York turned around to me and said, "Mr. Schorr, I've seen you on television. Why don't you tell us what's going on in Washington, what's really going on?" I said, "How do you mean? I really do my best." And he said, "Nah, but you people know things, you know all these big shots, and you're all in bed together, and there are things you don't tell us." I said, "Believe me, I'm not an insider, some people call me a quintessential outsider." (You might not think that looking at this audience tonight.) But it always has been important to me that I don't decide what the public should know. If I know, then the public should know.

I acted on that premise in 1976, when I had a copy of a report that the House Intelligence Committee had drafted, but which the House of Representatives, in its wisdom, decided to suppress. It developed that I now had the only copy of this report in the "free world." I not only divulged its contents in stories on CBS but then felt it was my duty to see that the whole report was published. I got into a lot of trouble---and at one point faced the threat of being cited for contempt of Congress---because of my principle that I don't suppress news.

Yet, a couple of times in my life I did. I'm not sure yet that I did right, but I did it. I'll tell you one of those episodes.

In 1957, I was in Poland working on a documentary for the CBS "See It Now" program. In the course of wandering around Poland for a couple of months, I came to a place in eastern Poland, a small town, where I saw an amazing sight. A bunch of people with horse-drawn carts on which their possessions were piled, like a scene from *Fiddler on the Roof*. I went up to them, and soon realized that they were Jews. I didn't speak Polish, []{#part0178.html_page826}so I spoke to them in Yiddish, and they addressed me in Yiddish, and they explained to me that they were going to Israel. That was quite remarkable, because in 1957, Jews were not being allowed to leave Soviet bloc countries to go to Israel. So I did interviews with them on film in Yiddish---nice little vignettes to go in this documentary of Poland today after Stalin. But I needed to know how this had been arranged.

Returning to Warsaw, I asked the Israeli minister how Jews were getting out of Poland to go to Israel. He asked, "How do know about that?" I said, "Well, I met some. I interviewed them." "Where?" he said. And I said, "Well in this town. In eastern Poland." He said, "Well, if you know that much, I'll tell you more, and then you can decide what you will do."

You see, the Soviet Union, at the end of the war, had occupied a part of Poland containing many Jews. They didn't want to stay there. And an arrangement was worked out among Israel, Poland, and the Soviet Union. Jews there could be "repatriated" to Poland, with the understanding that they would almost immediately leave for Israel, because Poland didn't want them. The Soviets, worried about reactions among their Arab friends, had stipulated that if the arrangement became known, it would stop immediately. "So," said my Israeli minister friend, "that's the story. If you want to go ahead, go ahead. But if you do, that's the end of Jews getting out of the Soviet Union." I said well, I'd have to see what I'd do about that.

This was all on 16-mm film, and we were shipping rolls of film every day to New York as part of this program that we would structure later. And I kept this roll of film there on my desk. I thought to call Murrow and see what he thought---couldn't call on an open telephone. And so the film remained with me in Poland. I didn't ship it. We finished the program; it went on the air. I came back to New York and saw Murrow, and said to him, "I think I've got to tell you something." And I told him that story. And he said, "I understand." Not quite approving. Not quite disapproving. Just saying, "I understand."

This episode has worried me over these years. How could I justify this suppression to myself? Oddly enough, I never really found a rationale for that until recently.

*Washington Post* reporter Milton Coleman once quoted Jesse Jackson using words like "Hymies" and "Hymie-town," which created a political sensation. But it developed, from Coleman's later account, that Jackson had preceded his anti-Semitic remarks by asking, "Can we talk 'black talk' for a minute?" And Coleman had let Jackson go on talking "black talk." I don't think Coleman should have reported what followed, because a reporter is not just a reporter. There are other circles of which one is a member. And isn't asking to talk "black talk" like saying, "It's off the record"?

[]{#part0178.html_page827}The Jackson-Coleman incident, some thirty years later, may have illuminated for me---maybe I'm rationalizing---why I could not expose the emigration of Jews from Poland. If I hadn't spoken Yiddish, I wouldn't have had the interview. Maybe this was like "black talk." It summoned you to membership in some other group beyond being just a reporter. And the older I get, the more I begin to realize that life isn't that simplicity of the young reporter saying, "Out of my way, Bud, I want that story, and if I get that story, there it goes." I have a greater and greater sense of complications.

Well, at seventy-five, I end up not having many problems like that, thanks to NPR and its wonderful way of dealing with me. I don't have the tyranny of bright lights and sound bites. Radio analysis is a simple matter of sitting down and writing it, and, if it seems to be in reasonable English, and if it's not too long, it goes on the air and maybe makes a small contribution to understanding. I'm still in a profession I love, always have loved, always will love. My profession may have become a tail on a big kite---the media industry. But at seventy-five I still see journalism as a noble and ennobling profession.

[]{#part0179.html}
