# British Conservative Benjamin Disraeli Speaks Up for Tory Principles {#part0192.html_c175 .toc}

::: block
*"I express here my confident conviction that there never was a moment in our history when the power of England was so great and her resources so vast and inexhaustible."*
:::

When Benjamin Disraeli first won a seat in Parliament, in 1837, the same year that Victoria ascended to the throne, his maiden speech was a personal and political disaster. His flowery language and affected style of dress caused him to be laughed off the floor of the House of Commons.

A dozen years later, however, Disraeli had become recognized as the leader of the House's Conservative party, and his skillful use of language allowed him to achieve success not only as a novelist but also as a persuasive statesman. With the rising fortunes of the Conservative party against Gladstone's liberalism, Disraeli eventually served as prime minister, securing the Suez Canal for England and adding "empress of India" to the titles of Queen Victoria, who made him earl of Beaconsfield.

[]{#part0192.html_page910}On April 3, 1872, Disraeli---who had once said, "Damn principle! Stick to your party"---delivered his forceful speech outlining the principles of the Conservative party. That speech, in Manchester, pared here from its original length of more than three hours, aligns the Conservative party's cause with the English Constitution and attacks the Liberal party, if not Prime Minister Gladstone himself. In a striking metaphor, Disraeli describes the ministers on the treasury bench in the House of Commons as "a range of exhausted volcanoes. Not a flame flickers on a single pallid crest. But the situation is still dangerous." By 1874, Disraeli had again become prime minister.

\*\*\*

**[...THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY]{.small}** are accused of having no program of policy. If by a program is meant a plan to despoil churches and plunder landlords, I admit we have no program. If by a program is meant a policy which assails or menaces every institution and every interest, every class and every calling in the country, I admit we have no program. But if to have a policy with distinct ends, and these such as most deeply interest the great body of the nation, be a becoming program for a political party, then I contend we have an adequate program, and one which, here or elsewhere, I shall always be prepared to assert and to vindicate.

Gentlemen, the program of the Conservative party is to maintain the Constitution of the country. I have not come down to Manchester to deliver an essay on the English Constitution; but when the banner of republicanism is unfurled---when the fundamental principles of our institutions are controverted---I think, perhaps, it may not be inconvenient that I should make some few practical remarks upon the character of our Constitution---upon that monarchy limited by the coordinate authority of the estates of the realm, which, under the title of Queen, Lords, and Commons, has contributed so greatly to the prosperity of this country, and with the maintenance of which I believe that prosperity is bound up.

Gentlemen, since the settlement of that Constitution, now nearly two centuries ago, England has never experienced a revolution, though there is no country in which there has been so continuous and such considerable change. How is this? Because the wisdom of your forefathers placed the prize of supreme power without the sphere of human passions. Whatever the struggle of parties, whatever the strife of factions, whatever the excitement and exaltation of the public mind, there has always been something in this country round which all classes and parties could rally, representing the majesty of the law, the administration of justice. []{#part0192.html_page911}and involving, at the same time, the security for every man's rights and the fountain of honor. Now, gentlemen, it is well clearly to comprehend what is meant by a country not having a revolution for two centuries. It means, for that space, the unbroken exercise and enjoyment of the ingenuity of man. It means for that space the continuous application of the discoveries of science to his comfort and convenience. It means the accumulation of capital, the elevation of labor, the establishment of those admirable factories which cover your district; the unwearied improvement of the cultivation of the land, which has extracted from a somewhat churlish soil harvests more exuberant than those furnished by lands nearer to the sun. It means the continuous order which is the only parent of personal liberty and political right. And you owe all these, gentlemen, to the throne....

The first consideration of a minister should be the health of the people. A land may be covered with historic trophies, with museums of science and galleries of art, with universities, and with libraries; the people may be civilized and ingenious; the country may be even famous in the annals and action of the world, but, gentlemen, if the population every ten years decreases, and the stature of the race every ten years diminishes, the history of that country will soon be the history of the past....

I doubt not there is in this hall more than one publican who remembers that last year an act of Parliament was introduced to denounce him as a "sinner." I doubt not there are in this hall a widow and an orphan who remember the profligate proposition to plunder their lonely heritage. But, gentlemen, as time advanced it was not difficult to perceive that extravagance was being substituted for energy by the government. The unnatural stimulus was subsiding. Their paroxysms ended in prostration. Some took refuge in melancholy, and their eminent chief alternated between a menace and a sigh. As I sat opposite the treasury bench, the ministers reminded me of one of those marine landscapes not very unusual on the coast of South America. You behold a range of exhausted volcanoes. Not a flame flickers on a single pallid crest. But the situation is still dangerous. There are occasional earthquakes, and ever and anon the dark rumbling of the sea....

Gentlemen, don't suppose, because I counsel firmness and decision at the right moment, that I am of that school of statesmen who are favorable to a turbulent and aggressive diplomacy. I have resisted it during a great part of my life. I am not unaware that the relations of England to Europe have undergone a vast change during the century that has just elapsed.

The relations of England to Europe are not the same as they were in the days of Lord Chatham or Frederick the Great. The queen of England has []{#part0192.html_page912}become the sovereign of the most powerful of Oriental states. On the other side of the globe there are now establishments belonging to her, teeming with wealth and population, which will, in due time, exercise their influence over the distribution of power. The old establishments of this country, now the United States of America, throw their lengthening shades over the Atlantic, which mix with European waters. These are vast and novel elements in the distribution of power. I acknowledge that the policy of England with respect to Europe should be a policy of reserve, but proud reserve; and in answer to those statesmen---those mistaken statesmen who have intimated the decay of the power of England and the decline of its resources---I express here my confident conviction that there never was a moment in our history when the power of England was so great and her resources so vast and inexhaustible.

And yet, gentlemen, it is not merely our fleets and armies, our powerful artillery, our accumulated capital, and our unlimited credit on which I so much depend, as upon that unbroken spirit of her people, which I believe was never prouder of the imperial country to which they belong. Gentlemen, it is to that spirit that I above all things trust. I look upon the people of Lancashire as fairly representative of the people of England. I think the manner in which they have invited me here, locally a stranger, to receive the expression of their cordial sympathy, and only because they recognize some effort on my part to maintain the greatness of their country, is evidence of the spirit of the land. I must express to you again my deep sense of the generous manner in which you have welcomed me, and in which you have permitted me to express to you my views upon public affairs. Proud of your confidence, and encouraged by your sympathy, I now deliver to you, as my last words, the cause of the Tory party, of the English Constitution, and of the British Empire.

[]{#part0193.html}
