# President Charles de Gaulle Offers Self-Determination to the Algerian People {#part0205.html_c188 .toc}

::: block
*"What had to be done was done."*
:::

"Je suis la France" ("I am France"), spoken by a defiant de Gaulle after his country's surrender to the Nazis in 1940, was typical of the innocent arrogance of a leader who thought he embodied the spirit of his nation---and, on occasion, did. His stiff-neckedness in the face of weakness caused Winston Churchill to say, "The heaviest cross I bear is the Cross of Lorraine."

Throughout the fifties, France was torn apart by the "Algerian question": the desire of many in the colony to break free and the fear of many others, especially in the army, that the French in Algeria would be driven out. Only Charles de Gaulle---head of the Free French in exile during World War II, in retirement after an electoral setback in 1953---had the prestige and the will to use authority to end the rebellion. Only he could tell the angry French generals, "You are not the army's army; you are France's army."

[]{#part0205.html_page974}The exponent of grandeur---"France cannot be France without greatness"---was given power to rule by decree in 1958; when an opponent compared him to Robespierre, he mockingly delivered this riposte: "I always thought I was Jeanne d'Arc and Bonaparte. How little one knows oneself." He understood the importance of speaking and of keeping silent: "There can be no power without mystery," he wrote in *The Edge of the Sword*. "There must always be a 'something' which others cannot altogether fathom, which puzzles them, stirs them, and rivets their attention.... Nothing more enhances authority than silence. It is the crowning virtue of the strong, the refuge of the weak, the modesty of the proud, the pride of the humble, the prudence of the wise, and the sense of fools...." He exuded certitude; when a Nixon speechwriter asked him about separatism in Canada's Quebec in 1969, de Gaulle answered with absolute assurance, "One day Quebec will be free."

Charles de Gaulle served as president of the Fifth Republic from 1958 to 1969. On June 8, 1962, he gave the following address over radio and television, preparing his people for the independence of Algeria.

\*\*\*

**[IN TWENTY-THREE DAYS]{.small}**, the Algerian problem in its substance will be resolved for France. Algeria will determine its own future. Algeria and France will be able to cooperate organically and regularly with each other. The Algerians of European stock will have the necessary guarantees to participate, in full freedom, in full equality, and in full brotherhood, in the life of the new Algeria. This is what France will have wanted and obtained.

Yes, in twenty-three days, the Algerian people, through the self-determination referendum, are going to ratify the Evian agreements, institute independence, and sanction cooperation, just as the French people, through the referendum of last April 8, subscribed to it for their part. Thus, over and above all the crises and all the passions, it is through the free decision and reasoned agreement of two peoples that a new phase in their relationships and a new chapter of their history are about to open.

This being so, what role can and must the Frenchmen of Algeria---who have settled there, who love Algeria, who have done so much there already, and of whom Algeria has so great a need---what role can and must these French people play in the Algeria of tomorrow? Once again I should like to express the hope that they will play their part fully, as soon as the last bloody mists with which some criminal madmen are still trying to blind them are dispelled. What role also can and must the leaders []{#part0205.html_page975}of the Moslem community play, for the good of their country---whether it be the leaders that are in office or the leaders that are about to take office, and who are certain before long to assume the capital responsibilities in the Algerian republic? What role, finally, must and can France play in the development of a nation to which she is attached by so many ties and which, everything commands her to help become free and prosperous? After 132 years of the existence of the problem, which had tragic consequences on several occasions, and after seven years of senseless and grievous fighting, this result will bear the imprint of justice and reason. However, in order to attain this, France has had to overcome severe obstacles.

When, in 1958, we came to grips with the affair, we found---who has been able to forget it?---the powers of the republic drowned in impotence, a plot of usurpation being formed in Algiers and drawn toward France by the collapse of the state, the nation suddenly finding itself on the brink of civil war. At the same time, the Moslem rebellion, having reached its climax and banking on our domestic crises, declared itself determined to triumph by arms, claimed to be sure of obtaining world support and offered the French community a single choice for its future: "the suitcase or the coffin." But, once the state was on its feet again and the catastrophe avoided---a recovery soon confirmed by the country's adoption of the necessary institutions by an 80 percent majority of the voters---it was possible, step by step, to bring the affair to its end.

It was necessary that, in Algeria, our army have control of the battlefield and the frontiers so that no failure could in any way jeopardize the will of France. It was necessary for us to squarely adopt self-determination and cooperation as political goals, while the implementation of the Constantine Plan was making all Algeria realize how essential France's aid was for its life. Thus the rebellion, renouncing its excesses and responding to the wish of the masses, came, little by little, to take the road to peace, to establish contact with us, and, finally, to conclude agreements permitting Algeria to express its will with full knowledge of the facts. It was necessary that the international attempts at interference and pressure, which were multiplying endlessly, have no hold over our policy. It was necessary that the successive plots be shattered: the affair of the barricades, the insurrection of April 1961, and, since then, the desperate acts of terrorist subversion, carried out, alas, by Frenchmen who resort to assassination, theft, and blackmail---all uprisings aimed at forcing the hand of the government, at shaking its foundations, toppling it, and hurling France into the abyss.

What had to be done was done. But---as everyone saw---it is because the new institutions enable the state to act---whereas the old ones only []{#part0205.html_page976}hindered it---that the government can make decisions instead of constantly equivocating and that it stands fast instead of forever tottering and stumbling. Above all, women and men of France, everyone has seen that the loyal confidence which you as a body have bestowed upon me has spurred and sustained me day after day and that this direct agreement between the people and the one who has the responsibility of leading it has become, in modern times, essential to the republic.

To maintain, in this domain, what has just been tested---such must be our conclusion, once the Algerian question has been settled. In these times that are difficult and dangerous, but filled with hope, how many things, indeed, have to be done that govern our destiny. To pursue our development---in the fields of economy, welfare, population, education, science, technology; to practice cooperation with those states of the world---above all, those of Africa---with which we are linked by virtue of ideals, language, culture, economy, and security; to contribute to the advancement of the two billion men who populate the underdeveloped countries; to equip ourselves with defense forces of such a kind that, for anyone, attacking France would mean certain death; to ensure together with our allies the integrity of the free world in the face of the Soviet threat; to help Western Europe build its unity, its prosperity, its strength, and its independence; to hasten the day when, perhaps---the totalitarian regime having lost its virulence and lowered its barriers---all the peoples of our continent will meet in an atmosphere of equilibrium, common sense, and friendship; in short, to accomplish the mission of France, we must, yes we must, be and freely remain a great and united people.

For the past four years, despite all the storms, this is fundamentally what we have been, as we then decided to be, overwhelmingly and solemnly, by means of universal suffrage. Justice and efficiency have thereby received their due. Women and men of France, we shall, by the same means, at the proper time, have to make sure that, in the future and above and beyond men who pass, the republic may remain strong, well ordered, and continuous.

*Vive la République! Vive la France!*

[]{#part0206.html}
