# []{#part0214.html_page1030 .calibre4}Labour's Neil Kinnock Excoriates Mrs. Thatcher's Toryism {#part0214.html_c197 .toc}

::: block
*"Why am I the first Kinnock in a thousand generations to be able to get to university?... It was because there was no platform upon which they could stand...."*
:::

Nell Kinnock, the youngest leader in the history of the British Labour party, brought his socialists back from the brink of leftist, unilateralist politics in the late eighties but could not topple the Tories' Margaret Thatcher. His oratorical style came to the attention of Americans when a candidate for the Democratic nomination in 1988, Senator Joe Biden, was accused of having plagiarized a Kinnock speech---which, it turned out, he had. The American's candidacy might have been saved by a simple willingness to attribute; nobody minds what speechwriters call "heavy lifting" as long as the source is acknowledged.

Kinnock's appeal to the heart and conscience of the voter was worth stealing: universal in its theme, personal in its presentation. In his stump speech, delivered without notes at the Wales Labour party conference in Llandudno on May 15, 1987, the Labour leader ripped into Thatcherism as a heartless philosophy that was more concerned with the stock market than with the whole economy, cared not for the worker's needs, and brought back the law of the jungle. His passionate speech, with minor changes, could be delivered with great effect by a liberal against a conservative anywhere in the world.

\*\*\*

**[THANK YOU VERY]{.small}** much for that warm welcome. I couldn't wish for a welcome other than one that came from a man of Aberdare, Roger Vallis, a good comrade and friend for over twenty years, a man who I admire for every reason, as does the whole Labour movement in Wales.

I am happy to report that we are definitely in the last month of Thatcherism. We are in the last few weeks of that job-destroying, justice-trampling, oil-wasting, truth-twisting, service-smashing, nation-splitting, bunch-of-twisters-under-one-person government. The last few weeks.

[]{#part0214.html_page1031}But apart from that they've got a great record. Well, they must be a great record! Mrs. Thatcher's told them to fight on that record; to fight with pride, she said. She's been telling her party, "Fight with pride on our record." I hope they do. Oh, I hope they take some notice of her there. I hope they do fight on their record---I hope they do fight with pride. "Pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall." And so, surely, fall they will on June the eleventh. They certainly deserve to. After eight years in government, a three million unemployment figure is not seen as the badge of shame; it's not seen as a cause of disappointment. A three million unemployment figure to them is a source of "celebration." Lord Young leads the cheering; Norman Tebbit does the lap of honor; Nigel Lawson, who couldn't do a lap of anything, he's just poppin' the corks, celebrating the fact that there are only three million unemployed; and the prime minister has decided to mark the event by becoming immortal!

On Tuesday, I read it in the papers: "Fourth-term target for Thatcher---on to the twenty-first century." Well, I suppose that fits. She's been lecturing us about the nineteenth century; now she's talking about the twenty-first century---all she's missed out is this century, the one that we're living in! That's all she's missed out!

But I've been watching her on TV this week. Apparently that's all I'm going to be able to do, 'cause she won't debate with me face-to-face on the issues. I've been watching her. I saw her on Wednesday night, and I realized that in addition to all the great reasons and great causes for getting rid of the Thatcher government, of displacing Mrs. Thatcher from Downing Street, there was another reason---one of humanity, one of compassion, one of consideration---we have to do it for Denis \[Thatcher\] as well!

But it was Monday night's performance that I found most interesting. She said she was full of ideas for continuing in the direction that they've been going. Full of ideas for continuing in the direction they've been going---well, we know what she means. New ideas like privatizing schools! New ideas like decontrolling rents! New ideas like paying for health care! What wonderful "fresh," "new" ideas! What a great way to greet the dawn of the twenty-first century, with these wonderful "new" ideas. But anybody attracted by those "ideas"---the privatization ideas, the decontrolling ideas; the flog-off, the sell-off ideas---had better ask themselves one question. They'd better ask themselves why every single one of those "new" ideas was abandoned fifty and more years ago. If, if the payment for schooling was such a wonderful idea, why was it abolitioned, treated as a great leap forward for the people of this country? If uncontrolled rents did so much for housing, so much for families, why []{#part0214.html_page1032}were they ever controlled? What malicious government ever decided that the landlords couldn't be left to deal with these things in their mercy? And when it came to paying for health care, if that was such a blessing, why was the ending of that system hailed as the greatest step forward in civilization, in postwar history? Believe me, the reason is simple, very simple. The system that existed before those changes, the very system that Margaret Thatcher wants to reintroduce in this country was wrong, and it was wretched, and it was squalid and brutal; it was rotten with injustice, and with misery, and with derision. That's why they got rid of it! That's why it was discarded---by popular demand! And that is why it must never be restored by prime ministerial demand.

That's why this election has come just in time! Just in time for those whose lives and skills are being wasted by unemployment. Just in time for the children in a school system that is deprived and derided by a secretary of state for education who won't send his own child to local schools. The election comes just in time for the old, who are being cheated out of pensions, and housing benefits, and much else. It's come just in time for our health service, with its three-quarters of a million people in pain on the waiting list. And it's come just in time, too, for all those who are not poor. Those who do not have children going through the schooling system. Those who are not old and anxious, not young and unemployed, not badly housed, not waiting for an operation---it's come in time for those people, too. All the people who are not badly off, but who know that Tory Britain is a more divided, deprived, and dangerous place now than it has been for decades past! All those people---the election has come just in time for them. Because they know, as you know, that when Britain has a prime minister that has allowed unemployment and poverty and waiting lists and closures and crime to go up, and up, and up, that is a prime minister who must not be allowed to go on, and on, and on.

Listen, comrades. Our country has taken a beating in the last eight years, from a government with an "on your bike" employment policy, a "stay in bed to keep warm" retirement policy, a "flag day" health service policy, and a "jumble sale" education system policy.

People all over this country know that Britain couldn't take thirteen years of that. Britain can't take thirteen years of Thatcherism. Britain can't serve such a life sentence without it becoming a death sentence for even more industries, and communities, and hopes---yes, and people, too! Because unemployment and poverty are not just "ailments," not just misfortunes! They are mortal afflictions, as every experience and figure shows. Not that it bothers the prime minister. It doesn't seem to influence []{#part0214.html_page1033}her at all. She will have us think that we are in the middle of a great "recovery." Difficult to see the evidence, unless of course you wait until the end of the news. *There* you can see the recovery! The stock market is up! There's the evidence for recovery! Unemployed? Don't worry, stay at home and watch the stock market going up on the television! Worried about redundancy? Don't worry, you can pass your time by looking at the Financial Times Share Index!

It strikes me very often, you know, that the reason that they put the stock market reports on the back end of the news alongside all those thrilling items about gerbils having triplets is because it's got just about as much relevance to real life, as the gerbil incident. But there's, there's the evidence for the great recovery!

"Recovery" is an awful funny word to use about eight years in which manufacturing production hasn't got back to the 1979 levels. "Recovery" is a very strange term to describe an economy that hasn't had an *increase* of two million unemployed since 1979. "Recovery" is a very peculiar label for a situation in which manufacturing investment is 20 percent *lower* than it was in 1979. "Recovery"---it's hardly the word to describe a country that in 1979 had a three-billion-pound *surplus* in manufacturing goods, and in 1987 has got an eight-billion-pound *deficit* in manufacturing goods! Buying more finished goods from the rest of the world than we're selling to the rest of the world for the first time in all our history---and that is a "recovery"? Is it a recovery when one in five of sixteen- to twenty-five-year-olds haven't got a job? Is it a recovery when you can hardly buy anything with a "Made in Britain" label in any shop, in any high street in this land? Is it a recovery when scientists are leaving in droves? Does that all become a recovery? I don't think it's much of a recovery.

Of course, there's been a little recent "speeding-up"; a slight "late thaw." It isn't recovery; it's a small remission in the condition of the economy that has gone through eight years of uninterrupted decline. And how has this little boomlet come about? How has it been ushered in this spring? Is it because the Tory policies are working? Is it because, for instance, at last they've achieved success with their strict monetary control? No, it can't be that, because we've got absolutely *record* credit and debt. There is no monetary control. So has the improvement come about because another policy's worked? Is it because they've cut taxation? Well, it can't be that, because the tax burden on the national economy is 18 percent higher than it was in 1979, and the tax burden on the average family is 10 percent higher than it was in 1979. So it can't be the great tax cuts. Is it because of strict controls on public expenditure? Has Willy Whitelaw's "Star Chamber" won at last? It can't be that either, because []{#part0214.html_page1034}last autumn after years of talk about "strict limits" on public expenditure there was an *overun* on public spending by 2.5 billion pounds. But, all of a sudden, it didn't matter any more. It was a sign of strength, instead of being an offense, directly, against the most cherished "nostrums" of Tory economic policy. Can this little boomlet be coming because the policy of letting the exchange rate find its own level, subject to market influences, eventually work? No. Because since last summer they've been spending *billions* on trying to control the exchange rate. So why has there been a slowdown in the rate of decline? Is it because their policies have worked? No. It's the opposite. It isn't because they've been *applying* their policies; it's because in the last six months they've been *abandoning* their policies! That's why we've got a slight recovery in the British economy at the present time.

They haven't taken what they call "the next step forward"; they've stood on their heads. That's what they've been doing. They've done it in a few other areas too. Remember, it's only a few months ago when they couldn't afford to spend on roads. They couldn't afford to spend on nurses. They couldn't afford to spend on the Air Bus. They couldn't afford to spend on cancer screening or on hospital waiting lists. They couldn't afford to keep small schools open. They couldn't afford to make heating allowances for the old. But, all of a sudden, in the last couple of months, *everything* is possible! It's not big. The Air Bus gets *half* of what it needs; the twenty-five million to cut the waiting lists---twelve and a half million of that will have to go on five thousand hip-replacement operations. So what are they going to get? A cut in the waiting lists of ninety-five thousand for twelve and a half million quid? They must be joking! I mean, small schools being kept open! It's a lovely idea. I'm expecting the parents from Havergrenist Primary School in my area to come to me and say, "Mr. Kinnock, do you think you could drop a line to Kenneth Baker or Nicholas Edwards if you can find him, and say, Could we have our school back?" It's rubbish! It's not going to happen. They're not going to keep those schools open; they have just given the impression that, suddenly, there is a great deal... of opportunity.

They haven't been making this recovery because of the successes of Tory policy. They haven't been operating Tory policy at all as the election approached. What they've done is to drop those policies, jettison them, put them into cold storage, stick them in the box. And they've done it because the Tories knew they couldn't face the country, in an election, on Tory policies. They couldn't face the country with their own policies. They knew that, faced with the oncoming election, and against the background of what they'd done in the previous years, they have to stimulate, []{#part0214.html_page1035}and soften, and sweeten. They have to show some concern. They knew they had to turn the stick into a carrot as the general election came along. That's the total sum of the recovery....

We don't think it's a soft sentiment. We don't think it's "wet," as Mrs. Thatcher calls it. We care all the time. We don't think it's a weak idea. We care all the time because we think that *care* is not weakness. Care to us is the very essence, the greatest demonstration of strength. That's what makes us democratic socialists. That's what makes us so categorically different from them. We believe that strength without care is savage, and brutal, and selfish. It's the strength of the jungle. We believe that strength, with care, is compassion; the practical action that is needed to help people *lift themselves*, lift themselves to their full stature, their full potential. The strength to care. Not the strength of the jungle but the strength of humanity. That's real care! It's not soft, it's not weak, it's strong and tough, and efficient. And where do we get the strength to provide that care? Do we wait around hoping for some stroke of good fortune? Waiting for some benign giant to turn up to deliver the people? Do we look for some socially conscious Samson to provide the care? We are rationalists. We're socialists. We're realists. We know that if we are going to *get* and going to *give* the standard of care that humanity requires we've got to get on with doing it, together. So we cooperate. We collect together. We coordinate so that everyone can contribute and everyone can benefit; everyone has responsibilities, like everyone enjoys rights. That's how we put care into action. That's how we make the weak strong. That's how we lift the needy. That's how we make the sick whole. That's how we give the talent the chance to flourish. That's how we turn the unemployed claimant into the employed contributor---by that collective action. By all being contributers, and all being beneficiaries. That's the sensible way to ensure that strength is translated into care. We do it together. We call it collective strength, collective care. And it's whole purpose is individual freedom. There's no paradox there.

When we speak of collective strength and collective freedom, collectively achieved, we are not fulfilling that nightmare that Mrs. Thatcher trys to paint, and all her predecessors have tried to saddle us with. We're not talking about uniformity; we're not talking about regimentation; we're not talking about *conformity*---that's their creed. The uniformity of the dole queue; the regimentation of the unemployed young and their compulsory work schemes. The *conformity* of people who will work in conditions, and take orders, and accept pay *because* of mass unemployment that they would laugh at in a free society with full employment.

That kind of freedom for the individual, that kind of liberty, can't be []{#part0214.html_page1036}secured by most of the people for most of the time if they're just left to themselves, isolated, stranded, with their whole life chances dependent upon luck! Why am I the first Kinnock in a thousand generations to be able to get to university? Why is Glenys the first woman in her family in a thousand generations to be able to get to university? Was it because *all* our predecessors were "thick"? Did they lack talent---those people who could sing, and play, and recite and write poetry; those people who could make wonderful, beautiful things, with their hands; those people who could dream dreams, see visions; those people who had such a sense of perception as to know in times so brutal, so oppressive, that they could win their way out of that by coming together? Were those people not university material? Couldn't they have knocked off all their "A" Levels in an afternoon? But why didn't they get it? Was it because they were weak---those people who could work eight hours underground and then come up and play football? Weak? Those women who could survive eleven childbearings, were they weak? Those people who could stand with their backs and their legs straight and face the great---the people who had control over their lives, the ones that owned their workplaces and tried to own them---and tell them, "No, I won't take your orders." Were they weak? Does anybody really think that they didn't get what we had because they didn't have the talent, or the strength, or the endurance, or the commitment? Of course not. It was because there was no platform upon which they could stand, no arrangement for their neighbors to subscribe to their welfare, no method by which the communities could translate its desires for those individuals into provision for those individuals. And now, Mrs. Thatcher, by dint of privatization, and means test, and deprivation, and division, wants to nudge us back into the situation where everybody can either stand on their own feet or live on their knees.

That's what this election is about as she parades her visions and values, and we choose to contest them as people with root in this country, with a future only in this country, with pride in this country. People who know that if we are to have and sustain real individual liberty in this country, it requires the collective effort of the whole community.

Of course, you'll hear the Tories talking a lot about freedom. You're going to hear a lot of that over the next month; a lot of talk of freedom from people who have spent much of the last eight years crushing individual freedoms under the weight of unemployment and poverty. Squeezing individual rights with cuts, and with means tests, and with charges. I think of the youngsters I meet. Three, four, five years out of school. Never had a job. And they say to me, "Do you think we'll ever get a job?" These are young men and women living in a free country, but they don't feel free.

[]{#part0214.html_page1037}I think of the fifty-five-year-old woman I meet, waiting months to go into hospital for an operation, her whole existence clouded by pain. She is a citizen of a free country, but she doesn't feel free.

I think of the young couple, two years married, living in their mam and dad's front room 'cause they can't get a home. Seeing their family relationship deteriorate from what was the greatest friendship, and kinship, in their family on their wedding day, to the most bitter contradictions and conflicts within that household. Those young people, they live in a free country, but they don't feel free.

I think of the old couple. We all know them. The old people, going for months through the winter afraid to turn the heat up. Staying at home, afraid to go out after dark. Old people for whom the need to buy a new pair of shoes is an economic crisis! They live in a free country---indeed they're of the generation that *fought* for a free country---but they don't feel free.

How can---how can they, and millions like them, have their individual freedom if there is not collective provision? How can they have *strength* if they haven't that, just that little bit of support---of care? That helping hand. They can't have either. They can't have either strength or care now, because they are locked out of being able to discharge their responsibilities, just as surely as they are locked out of their ability to enjoy rights. And they are fellow citizens. They want to be able to use both rights and responsibilities. They don't want featherbedding. They want a foothold. They don't want cosseting, or cotton-wooling, they want a chance to *contribute*. The greatest privilege is to be able to bear responsibility, not discharge rights. Rights are great. They can be plastered on walls, written in bills; but it's responsibilities that you *can* discharge---that's when you feel strong, because you've got the means, you've got the strength, you've got the rights. They can't discharge responsibilities or rights, and they want the freedom to do so. That's the freedom we want them, as democratic socialists, to have. That's a freedom that we seek power to get and to spread in our country.

Freedom, with fairness. That's our aim. And the means that we choose for pursuing that aim, achieving that aim, is investment. Investment in people. Investing in people to cut unemployment by one million in the first two years of the Labour government. Investing in people to build and to repair the homes and the schools and the hospitals and the roads that this country needs. Investing in people to gain new jobs, and new strength in industry; investing in people to provide the teaching, and the healing, and the caring services. Investing in people to pull them out of poverty in our country by paying higher pensions. By freeing them from []{#part0214.html_page1038}pain by making extra commitment to the health service. By giving them the means to flourish by investing in education.

Of course, they're big bills! Nobody's offering miracles; that was the preserve of the monetarists. But what we do say is, With the chance, with the tools for the job, with that bit of backing, with that investment, then we can secure the objectives of building strength for the individual and for the whole country. That's why we say invest in people---and the resources are there. Oh, it isn't that the resources are not there; the resources are there in Nigel Lawson's 2p tax cut! The tuppenny tories! They've shown us that the resources are there. Spent the way that Nigel Lawson wants to spend it, it'll cost 2.5 billion pounds, and it will create in this country about eighty thousand jobs. It'll create a lot more jobs elsewhere, 'cause most of the cash will be spent on imports. If that same 2.5 billion pounds was *targeted* on construction, on manufacturing, on caring, it would produce three hundred thousand jobs. That's the bargain for Britain!...

There's certainly a lot to do, 'cause Mrs. Thatcher's greatest demonstration of patriotism was to remove capital controls and to allow, in the eight years that she's been prime minister, a net outflow of sixty thousand million pounds in investment from our country that wouldn't have otherwise gone. Going to finance the technological revolutions of our competitors; going to strengthen *their* industry when our country has been run down and a quarter of our manufacturing industry lost: two million manufacturing jobs lost as a result of policies of a prime minister that is shoveling support to those who are in contention with us in the markets of the world....

They've been shutting down, selling off, selling out this country. And everyone in this country, whoever they are, whatever they do, wherever they live, whatever their politics, is going to ask a question in this election that is absolutely central: How do we pay our way if that is the future? How do we pay our way with a future empty of any industrial policy or strategy? How do we pay our way in the world; how do we pay for the necessities; how do we help the needy of the world; how do we influence others in this world if we can't pay our way? How, too, do we pay our way at home if we've not got the source of wealth generation---the way to make a national living? How do we generate the wealth necessary to give employment, to provide education, to finance health care, to pay for decent pensions? Can we do any of that?

The answer is, at home and abroad, if we don't make the goods, and market the goods, then we don't pay our way! That's the future I'm not prepared to accept. It's a future that I'm not prepared to offer to my children, []{#part0214.html_page1039}or offer to my contemporaries. I want to be able, in twenty years' time, because we've made our commitment to building industrial strength and generating jobs, in twenty years' time I want to be able to go down any street in Britain and meet a thirty-six-year-old who is sixteen at the moment, or meet a fifty-year-old who is thirty at the moment, and be able to look them in the eye and say, Yes, it was the case, that in the late 1980s 'cause we could see what was happening in the future, and we knew what the needs of our economy were, we were prepared to commit the resources and give us a *strength* of industrial development that Torism could never provide. I want to be one of those people. And this whole generation of the Labour movement wants it, to be able to stand alongside those people of the 1940s who never had to blush when they met us in the 1960s 'cause *they* could say to us, Yes, we built. Yes, we provided. Yes, we tried to make a future. That---that's the constructive way. That's the way to make a future for all the people who contribute to doing it---no free rides, no easy options, no miracles, no cheap routes. Planning, and providing, to make that future. Oh, we can do it! This country has the skills and the abilities, knowledge and wisdom, and the commitment to do it. We can do it.

But we can't do it with the Tories, for they only offer a future of failure, a future of rundown. A future of great prosperity for the few and great insecurity and decline for the many. That's where we've been heading through industrial contraction, and trade loss, and unemployment, ever since Margaret Thatcher went into 10 Downing Street eight years ago.

It is because of that record that we have some of the greatest reasons for seeing that she is put out of 10 Downing Street in a month's time. And in a few weeks' time that is what we, and the British people, will do.

[]{#part0215.html}
