## `<?pagebreak number="10" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter003.html_p10}Joseph Chamberlain Birmingham, 15 May 1903 {#chapter003.html_pen0000190 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'I believe in a British Empire and I do not believe in a Little England' {#chapter003.html_pen0000194 .EB10SmallHead}

> *The campaign for tariff reform, memorably advocated by Joseph Chamberlain (1836--1914) in this speech at Birmingham, split the Conservative Party, convulsed the country and eventually handed power for nearly two decades to the Liberals, led by Asquith and Lloyd George.*
>
> *Chamberlain, at first a radical Liberal whose opposition to Irish Home Rule in 1886 had split the party and brought down the government, had joined the Tories and now proposed protection, renamed tariff reform, in order to unite the Dominions (such as Canada and South Africa) to the Empire by preferential tariffs.*
>
> *He provoked a great sensation. 'The Birmingham speech,' wrote Leo Amery, the Tory politician, was 'a challenge to free trade as direct and provocative as the theses which Luther nailed to the church door at Wittenberg. To many of the younger generation, passionately imperialist by conviction, beginning to be intellectually sceptical about free trade, the speech was a sudden crystallization of all their ideals in an imperious call to action.'*

I cannot look forward without dread to handing over the security and existence of this great Empire to the hands of those who have made common cause with its enemies, who have charged their own countrymen with methods of barbarism, and who apparently have been untouched by that pervading sentiment which I found everywhere where the British flag floats, and which has done so much in recent years to draw us together. I should not require to go to South Africa in order to be convinced that this feeling has obtained deep hold on the minds and hearts of our children beyond the seas. It has had a hard life of it, this feeling of Imperial patriotism. It was checked for a generation by the apathy and the indifference which were the characteristics of our former relations with our Colonies, but it was never extinguished. The embers were still alight, and when `<?pagebreak number="11" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter003.html_p11}in the late war this old country of ours showed that it was still possessed by the spirit of our ancestors, and that it was still prepared to count no sacrifice that was necessary in order to maintain the honour and the interests of the Empire, then you found a response from your children across the seas that astonished the whole world by a proof, an undeniable proof, of affection and regard.

Is it to end there? Are we to sink back into the old policy of selfish isolation which went very far to dry and even to sap the loyalty of our colonial brethren? I do not think so. I think these larger issues touch the people of this country. I think they have awakened to the enormous importance of a creative time like the present, and of taking advantage of the opportunities offered in order to make permanent what has begun so well. Remember, we are a kingdom, an old country. We proceed here on settled lines. We have our quarrels and our disputes, and we pass legislation which may be good or bad; but we know that, whatever changes there may be, at all events the main stream will ultimately reach its appointed destination. That is the result of centuries of constitutional progress and freedom.

But the Empire is not old. The Empire is new -- the Empire is in its infancy. Now is the time when we can mould that Empire and when we and those who live with us can decide its future destinies. Just let us consider what that Empire is; I am not going tonight to speak of those hundreds of millions of our Indian and native fellow subjects for whom we have become responsible. I consider for the moment only our relations to that white British population that constitutes the majority in the great self-governing colonies of the Empire. Here in the United Kingdom there are some forty millions of us. Outside there are ten millions of men either directly descended from ancestors who left this country or more probably men who themselves in their youth left this country in order to find their fortunes in our possessions abroad. How long do you suppose that this proportion of population is going to endure? The development of those colonies has been delayed by many reasons -- but mainly probably by a more material reason -- by the fact that the United States of America has offered a greater attraction to British emigration.

But that has changed. The United States, with all their vast territory, `<?pagebreak number="12" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter003.html_p12}are filling up; and even now we hear of tens of thousands of emigrants leaving the United States in order to take up the fresh and rich lands of our colony in Canada. It seems to me not at all an impossible assumption that before the end of this present century we may find our fellow subjects beyond the seas as numerous as we are at home. I want you to look forward. I want you to consider the infinite importance of this not only to yourselves but to your descendants. Now is the time when you can exert influence. Do you wish that if these ten millions become forty millions they shall still be closely, intimately, affectionately united to you, or do you contemplate the possibility of their being separated, going off each in his own direction, under a separate flag? Think what it means to your power and influence as a country; think what it means to your position among the nations of the world; think what it means to your trade and commerce -- I put that last.

What is the meaning of an Empire? What does it mean to us? We have had a little experience. We have had a war, a war in which the majority of our children abroad had no apparent direct interest. We had no hold over them of any kind, and yet at one time during this war, by the voluntary decision of these people, at least 50,000 Colonial soldiers were standing shoulder to shoulder with British troops, displaying a gallantry equal to their own and the keenest intelligence. It is something for a beginning, and if this country were in danger, I mean if we were, as our forefathers were, face to face some day -- Heaven forfend -- with some great coalition of hostile nations, when we had with our backs to the wall to struggle for our very lives, it is my firm conviction there is nothing within the power of these self-governing colonies they would not do to come to our aid. I believe their whole resources in men and in money would be at the disposal of the Mother Country in such an event. That is something -- something which it is wonderful to have achieved, and which it is worth almost any sacrifice to maintain ...

I believe in a British Empire, in an Empire which, though it should be its first duty to cultivate friendship with all the nations of the world, should yet, even if alone, be self-sustaining and self-sufficient, able to maintain itself against the competition of all its rivals. And I `<?pagebreak number="13" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter003.html_p13}do not believe in a Little England which shall be separated from all those to whom it would in the natural course look for support and affection, a Little England which would then be dependent absolutely on the mercy of those who envy its present prosperity, and who have shown they are ready to do all in their power to prevent its future union with the British races throughout the world.

> *The tariff reform campaign was a disaster for the Conservative Party. It united the Liberals, lost the Tories the general election of 1906, put the Liberals into power for nearly twenty years, and was a major factor in pushing the Tories into rejecting Lloyd George's 1909 'People's Budget'.*
>
> *Chamberlain was struck down by paralysis in 1906 and played no further part in politics.*

[•]{.center}
