## F. E. Smith (Lord Birkenhead) House of Commons, 11 March 1906 {#chapter003.html_pen0000211 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'I warn the Government' {#chapter003.html_pen0000215 .EB10SmallHead}

> *More than a hundred years later, the maiden speech in 1906 by the English barrister F. E. Smith (1872--1930), Conservative MP for Liverpool, Walton (and subsequently Lord Birkenhead), is still considered the most famous ever made in the House of Commons. The main reason was its sheer audacity -- Smith, the new MP, dared to tweak the tails of such lions as Lloyd George and Winston Churchill. As his latest biographer, John Campbell, writes: 'He gambled for the highest stake; and won ... and in this one dazzling hour wrote his name more indelibly than by any other of his more solemn later actions into the history of Parliament.'*
>
> *The Tories had been routed by the Liberals in the 1906 general election. One reason was the tariff reform campaign espoused by Joseph Chamberlain. Smith was speaking against a Liberal resolution stating that the people of the United Kingdom had demonstrated their 'unqualified fidelity' to the principles and practice of free trade and recording its determination to resist any proposal to create a system of protection.*

`<?pagebreak number="14" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter003.html_p14}Unemployment yearly grows chronic over a larger area, while a Parliament of Free Importers celebrates in academic resolutions the economic system which has depopulated rural England, has filled the emigrant steamers with fugitives from these happy shores, and has aggravated the evils of the most revolting slums in Christendom. The progress of tonight's debate makes one profoundly conscious of the constructive shortcomings of the Cobdenism of today. I myself am a perfectly unrepentant member of the Tariff Reform League. I do not know how many members of the league there may be in the House; it may be that a division would show that they are not more numerous than the representatives of the Liberal League. I have, at least, the satisfaction of reflecting that, if tariff reform is found not to be a winning horse, I have not necessarily compromised my political future. I have in hon. and right hon. gentlemen opposite an admirable example of how to cut the painter of a similar league, with the maximum of political advancement, and the minimum of fidelity to a founder. Such a model of chivalrous loyalty is of great value to a young member of Parliament ...

The resolution before the House consists of two parts. In the first, we are asked to recognize the merits of what is described on an obscure prescriptive principle as free trade, and, in the second, we are invited to register the proposition that the country gave an unqualified verdict in its favour. The word 'unqualified' is in itself ambiguous, and may have more than one meaning. If we say that a man is an unqualified slave, we mean that his condition can be honestly described as completely servile, and not, merely, as semi-servile. If, on the other hand, we say that a man is an unqualified medical practitioner, or an unqualified under-secretary, we mean that he is not entitled to any particular respect, because he has not passed through the normal period of training, or preparation. It is, on the whole, probable that the word is used in the first sense in the present motion.

But, perhaps, it is necessary to distinguish even further. When hon. gentlemen opposite are successful at the polls, it is probably used in the first sense. In the comparatively few cases in which I and my friends were successful, it is used in the second. Birmingham, `<?pagebreak number="15" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter003.html_p15}under circumstances which will never be effaced from the memory of hon. gentlemen, on whichever side of the House they sit, displayed the rare and beautiful quality of political constancy, and voted in all its divisions for tariff reform. \[Laughter.\] The result is sneered at, in the spirit of the laughter which we have just heard, as a triumph for Tammanyism, or, more profoundly analysed by an eminent Nonconformist divine, as an instance of that mysterious dispensation, which occasionally permits the ungodly to triumph. Hon. gentlemen opposite are, in fact, very much more successful controversialists than hon. members on this side of the House.

It is far easier, if one is a master of scholarly irony, and of a charming literary style, to describe protection as a 'stinking rotten carcase' than to discuss scientifically whether certain limited proposals are likely to prove protective in their incidence. It is far easier, if one has a strong stomach, to suggest to simple rustics, as the President of the Board of Trade did, that, if the Tories came into power, they would introduce slavery on the hills of Wales. \[Mr L[LOYD]{.smallcaps} G[EORGE]{.smallcaps}: 'I did not say that.'\]

The right hon. gentleman would, no doubt, be extremely anxious to forget it, if he could; but, anticipating a temporary lapse of memory, I have in my hand the *Manchester Guardian* of 16 January 1906, which contains a report of his speech. The right hon. gentleman said: 'What would they say to introducing Chinamen at 1s. a day into the Welsh quarries? Slavery on the hills of Wales! Heaven forgive me for the suggestion!' I have no means of judging how heaven will deal with persons who think it decent to make such suggestions. The distinction drawn by the right hon. gentleman is more worthy of the county court than of the Treasury Bench. I express a doubt whether any honest politician will ever acquit the right hon. gentleman of having deliberately given the impression to those he thus addressed that, if the Conservative Party were returned, the hills of Wales would be polluted by conditions of industrial slavery. The alternative construction is that the right hon. gentleman thought it worth his while, in addressing ignorant men \['No'\] -- in relation to the right hon. gentleman they are ignorant; is that disputed? -- to put before ignorant men an abstract and academic statement as to Chinese `<?pagebreak number="16" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter003.html_p16}labour on the hills of Wales. If he did not mean his hearers to draw the false but natural inference, why make any reference to Chinese slavery as a conceivable prospect on the hills of Wales?

Since this House of Commons met, we have heard a great deal about the war. I would suggest to hon. gentlemen, as a humble admirer of their methods, that, if they wish for targets in that matter, they ought to aim, not at the Opposition Benches, but at right hon. gentlemen who sit on the Front Government Bench. Hon. gentlemen opposite should remember that the present Secretary of State for War \[Lord (then Mr) Haldane\] justly observed that the Boers waged the war, not only with the object of maintaining their independence, but also to undermine our authority in South Africa; and the present Attorney-General \[Sir John Lawson Walton\] said that the war could be shown to be as just, as it was inevitable, and to have been defensible on the grounds of freedom. The circumstances of which you complain were anterior to the war. While the only panacea which hon. gentlemen opposite can suggest is the employment of broken down artisans in planting trees, and constructing dams against the encroachment of the sea, the Unionist Party need not be discouraged by their reverses at the polls. We will say of the goddess who presides over the polls, as Dryden said of Fortune in general:

> I can enjoy her while she's kind;
>
> But when she dances in the wind,
>
> And shakes her wings, and will not stay,
>
> I puff the prostitute away.

Was the verdict unqualified, having regard to the aggregate number of votes polled on behalf of Liberal members? The votes polled at the last election for Liberal, Labour, and Nationalist candidates were 3,300,000, while those polled for tariff reform candidates and other gentlemen sitting around me were 2,500,000. \['No! Not true!'\] I gather that it is suggested that my figures are wrong. \['Yes.'\] They very probably are. I took them from the *Liberal Magazine*.

Perhaps the Minister of Education \[Mr Birrell\] was responsible for them, before he gave up the hecatomb line of business for the `<?pagebreak number="17" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter003.html_p17}Christian toleration and charity department. I venture to suggest to hon. gentlemen opposite, that the figures I have quoted, so far as they are accurate, are not altogether discouraging to those who, for the first time after so many years of blind dogma, have challenged the verdict of the country on the issue of tariff reform. What would hon. gentlemen who represent Ireland say, if it was suggested that they were Cobdenites? Will one of them get up to say that Cobdenism has brought prosperity or success to Ireland, or to guarantee that a representative Irish Parliament would not introduce a general tariff on foreign manufactured articles? The jury who gave this unqualified verdict is unaccountably silent. The spectacle of the Cobdenite hen cackling over a protectionist duckling of her own hatching in Ireland would add a partially compensating element of humour even to the prospect of Home Rule.

The Irish and -- I may add -- the Indian case for tariff reform were both once and for all conceded by the 'infant community' admission of Adam Smith. Why do we force upon India and Ireland alike a system, of which every honest man knows that -- whether it be good or bad for us -- it denies to them the right to develop and mature their nascent industries upon the lines in which they themselves most earnestly believe, and in which every country in the world except Great Britain believes? The answer is as short as it is discreditable. We perpetuate this tyranny in order that our Indian and Irish fellow-subjects may be forced to buy from our manufacturers articles which they would otherwise attempt to manufacture for themselves. In other words, we perpetuate in these two cases a compulsory and unilateral trade preference -- demonstrably the fruit of selfishness -- at the sacrifice of a voluntary and bilateral preference, based deep and strong upon mutual interest and mutual affection.

I have heard the majority on the other side of the House described as the pure fruit of the Cobdenite tree. I should rather say that they were begotten by Chinese slavery out of passive resistance, by a rogue sire out of a dam that roared. I read a short time ago that the Free Church Council claimed among its members as many as two hundred of hon. gentlemen opposite.

The Free Church Council gave thanks publicly for the fact that `<?pagebreak number="18" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter003.html_p18}Providence had inspired the electors with discrimination to vote on the right side. Mr Speaker, I do not, more than another man, mind being cheated at cards; but I find it a little nauseating if my opponent then publicly ascribes his success to the partnership of the Most High. What the future of this Parliament has in store for right hon. and hon. gentlemen opposite I do not know, but I hear that the Government will deny to the Colonial Conference of 1907 free discussion on the subject which the House is now debating, so as to prevent the statement of unpalatable truths. I know that I am the insignificant representative of an insignificant numerical minority in this House, but I venture to warn the Government that the people of this country will neither forget nor forgive a party which, in the heyday of its triumph, denies to the infant Parliament of the Empire one jot or tittle of that ancient liberty of speech which our predecessors in this House vindicated for themselves at the point of the sword.

> *Smith became Attorney-General in 1915 and Lord Chancellor at the age of forty-seven. He appeared for the Crown in the prosecution of Roger Casement and played a major role in the Irish settlement of 1921. He coined the phrase, 'The world continues to offer glittering prizes to those who have stout hearts and sharp swords.'*

[•]{.center}
