## `<?pagebreak number="21" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p21}Emmeline Pankhurst London, 24 March 1908 {#chapter004.html_pen0000256 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The plight of women' {#chapter004.html_pen0000260 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Emmeline Pankhurst (1858--1928), leader of the British suffragettes, formed the Women's Franchise League in 1889, but it was not until 1903 that she was persuaded by her daughter Christabel (1880--1958) to found the more militant Women's Social and Political Union. After meeting Herbert Asquith, the Liberal prime minister, in 1906, she despaired of winning the vote from a Liberal government and began to resort to militant tactics.*
>
> *She made this speech at the Portman Rooms in London. A few months later she was arrested after suffragettes tried to 'rush' the House of Commons.*

Men politicians are in the habit of talking to women as if there were no issues that affect women. 'The fact is,' they say, 'the home is the place for women. Their interests are the rearing and training of children. These are the things that interest women. Politics have nothing to do with these things, and therefore politics do not concern women.' Yet the laws decide how women are to live in marriage, how their children are to be trained and educated, and what the future of their children is to be. All that is decided by Act of Parliament. Let us take a few of the laws, and see what there is to say about them from the women's point of view.

First of all, let us take the marriage laws. They are made by men for women. Let us consider whether they are equal, whether they are just, whether they are wise. What security of maintenance has the married woman? Many a married woman having given up her economic independence in order to marry, how is she compensated for that loss? What security does she get in that marriage for which she gave up economic independence? Take the case of a woman who has been earning a good income. She is told that she ought to give up her employment when she becomes a wife and a mother. What does she get in return? All that a married man is obliged by law to do for his wife is to provide `<?pagebreak number="22" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p22}for her shelter of some kind, food of some kind, and clothing of some kind. It is left to his good pleasure to decide what the shelter shall be, what the food shall be, what the clothing shall be. It is left to him to decide what money shall be spent on the home, and how it shall be spent; the wife has no voice legally in deciding any of these things. She has no legal claim upon any definite portion of his income. If he is a good man, a conscientious man, he does the right thing. If he is not, if he chooses almost to starve his wife, she has no remedy. What he thinks sufficient is what she has to be content with.

I quite agree, in all these illustrations, that the majority of men are considerably better than the law compels them to be, so the majority of women do not suffer as much as they might suffer if men were all as bad as they might be, but since there are some bad men, some unjust men, don't you agree with me that the law ought to be altered so that those men could be dealt with? ...

Now let us look at \[the woman's\] position if she had been very unfortunate in marriage, so unfortunate as to get a bad husband, an immoral husband, a vicious husband, a husband unfit to be the father of little children. We turn to the Divine Court. How is she to get rid of such a man? If a man has got married to a bad wife, and he wants to be rid of her, he has but to prove against her one act of infidelity. But if a woman who is married to a vicious husband wants to get rid of him, not one act nor a thousand acts of infidelity entitle her to a divorce; she must prove either bigamy, desertion, or gross cruelty, in addition to immorality before she can get rid of that man.

Let us consider her position as a mother. We have repeated this so often at our meetings that I think the echo of what we have said must have reached many. By English law no married woman exists as the mother of the child she brings into the world. In the eyes of the law she is not the parent of her child. The child, according to our marriage laws, has only one parent, who can decide the future of the child, who can decide where it shall live, how it shall live, how much shall be spent upon it, how it shall be educated, and what religion it shall profess. That parent is the father.

These are examples of some of the laws that men have made, laws that concern women. I ask you, if women had had the vote, should we `<?pagebreak number="23" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p23}have had such laws? If women had had the vote, as men have the vote, we should have had equal laws. We should have had equal laws for divorce, and the law would have said that as nature has given to children two parents, so the law should recognize that they have two parents.

I have spoken to you about the position of the married woman who does not exist legally as a parent, the parent of her own child. In marriage, children have one parent. Out of marriage children have also one parent. That parent is the mother -- the unfortunate mother. She alone is responsible for the future of her child; she alone is punished if her child is neglected and suffers from neglect. But let me give you one illustration. I was in Herefordshire during the by-election. While I was there, an unmarried mother was brought before the bench of magistrates charged with having neglected her illegitimate child. She was a domestic servant, and had put the child out to nurse. The magistrates -- there were colonels and landowners on that bench -- did not ask what wages the mother got; they did not ask who the father was or whether he contributed to the support of the child. They sent that woman to prison for three months for having neglected her child. I ask you women here tonight, if women had had some share in the making of the laws, don't you think they would have found a way of making all fathers of such children equally responsible with the mothers for the welfare of those children?

> *Pankhurst was arrested again in 1909 (when forcible feeding was introduced to deal with the hunger strikes of the suffragettes) at the door of the Commons.*

[•]{.center}
