## David Lloyd George London, 30 July 1909 {#chapter004.html_pen0000276 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The People's Budget' {#chapter004.html_pen0000280 .EB10SmallHead}

> *The historic budget introduced in 1909 by David Lloyd George (1863--1945) proposed a modest supertax on the very rich and new taxes on land. Its aim, he said, was to wage implacable warfare against poverty and squalor. After the first `<?pagebreak number="24" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p24}national pension scheme of 1908, he had to provide for old-age pensions and to meet a heavy demand for naval construction. The budget was thrown out by the House of Lords after a momentous national controversy -- an action which provoked the conflict between Lords and Commons that eventually led to the Parliament Act of 1911 and curbed the power of the hereditary lords.*
>
> *Lloyd George's first full-scale defence of his budget was at Limehouse in London where he addressed an audience of 4,000 at the Edinburgh Castle. The speech provoked tumultuous applause from the audience of cockneys. It also provoked King Edward VII, who dispatched a message to Lloyd George from the royal yacht saying his speech was 'calculated to set class against class and to inflame the passions of the working and lower orders against people who happened to be owners of property'.*
>
> *A master of improvised speech, Lloyd George, with his seductive, vibrant voice, was the greatest natural orator in an age of great orators. He spoke with his audiences and not to them. 'My platform is the country,' he said, and he gave his audiences a music-hall turn.*
>
> *He mobilized the forces of change outside parliament as only a very few, such as Cobden, Gladstone and Joseph Chamberlain, had done before -- but his driving passion was to action more than speech, to put far-reaching measures on the Statute Book and to root out the palpable injustices he saw all around him. He was the true founder of the Welfare State.*

A few months ago a meeting was held not far from this hall, in the heart of the city of London, demanding that the government should launch out and run into enormous expenditure on the navy. That meeting ended up with a resolution promising that those who passed that resolution would give financial support to the government in their undertaking. There have been two or three meetings held in the City of London since, attended by the same class of people, but not ending up with a resolution promising to pay. On the contrary, we are spending the money, but they don't pay. What has happened since to alter their tone? Simply that we have sent in the bill. We started our four Dreadnoughts. They cost eight millions of money. We promised them four more; they cost another eight millions. Somebody has got to pay, and these gentlemen say, 'Perfectly true; somebody has got to pay, but we would rather that somebody were `<?pagebreak number="25" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p25}somebody else.' We started building; we wanted money to pay for the building; so we sent the hat round. We sent it round amongst the workmen and the miners of Derbyshire and Yorkshire, the weavers of Dumfries, who, like all their countrymen, know the value of money. They all brought in their coppers. We went round Belgravia, but there has been such a howl ever since that it has completely deafened us.

But they say, 'It is not so much the Dreadnoughts we object to, it is the pensions.' If they object to pensions, why did they promise them? They won elections on the strength of their promises. It is true they never carried them out. Deception is always a pretty contemptible vice, but to deceive the poor is the meanest of all crimes. But they say, 'When we promised pensions we meant pensions at the expense of the people for whom they were provided. We simply meant to bring in a bill to compel workmen to contribute to their own pensions.' If that is what they meant, why did they not say so? The budget is introduced not merely for the purpose of raising barren taxes, but taxes that are fertile taxes, taxes that will bring forth fruit -- the security of the country which is paramount in the midst of all. The provision for the aged and deserving poor -- it was time it was done. It is rather a shame for a rich country like ours -- probably the richest country in the world, if not the richest the world has ever seen -- that it should allow those who have toiled all their days to end in penury and possibly starvation. It is rather hard that an old workman should have to find his way to the gates of the tomb, bleeding and footsore, through the brambles and thorns of poverty. We cut a new path through it, an easier one, a pleasanter one, through fields of waving corn. We are raising money to pay for the new road, aye, and to widen it, so that 200,000 paupers shall be able to join in the march. There are many in the country blessed by Providence with great wealth, and if there are amongst them men who grudge out of their riches a fair contribution toward the less fortunate of their fellow countrymen, they are shabby rich men. We propose to do more by means of the budget. We are raising money to provide against the evils and the sufferings that follow from unemployment. We are raising money for the purpose of assisting our great friendly societies to `<?pagebreak number="26" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p26}provide for the sick and the widows and orphans. We are providing money to enable us to develop the resources of our own land. I do not believe any fair-minded man would challenge the justice and the fairness of the objects which we have in view in raising this money ...

Have you been down a coal-mine? I was telling you I went down one the other day. We sank down into a pit half a mile deep. We then walked underneath the mountain, and we did about three-quarters of a mile with rock and shale above us. The earth seemed to be straining -- around us and above us -- to crush us in. You could see the pit-props bent and twisted and sundered until you saw their fibres split. Sometimes they give way, and then there is mutilation and death. Often a spark ignites, the whole pit is deluged in fire, and the breath of life is scorched out of hundreds of breasts by the consuming fire.

In the very next colliery to the one I descended, just three years ago, three hundred people lost their lives in that way, and yet when the Prime Minister and I knock at the door of these great landlords and say to them, 'Here, you know these poor fellows who have been digging up royalties at the risk of their lives, some of them are old, they have survived the perils of their trade, they are broken, they can earn no more. Won't you give something towards keeping them out of the workhouse?' -- they scowl at you. And we say, 'Only a ha'penny, just a copper!' They say, 'You thieves!' And they turn their dogs on to us, and every day you can hear their bark. If this is an indication of the view taken by these great landlords of their responsibility to the people who, at the risk of life, create their wealth, then I say their day of reckoning is at hand.

The other day, at the great Tory meeting held at the Cannon Street Hotel, they had blazoned on the walls, 'We protest against the budget in the name of democracy, liberty, and justice.' Where does the democracy come in this landed system? Where is the justice in all these transactions? We claim that the tax we impose on land is fair, just, and moderate. They go on threatening that if we proceed they will cut down their benefactions and discharge labour. What kind of labour? What is the labour they are going to choose for dismissal? Are they going to threaten to devastate rural England, while feeding them`<?pagebreak number="27" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p27}selves and dressing themselves? Are they going to reduce their gamekeepers? That would be sad! The agricultural labourer and the farmer might then have some part of the game which they fatten with their labour. But what would happen to you in the season? No weekend shooting with the Duke of Norfolk for any of us! But that is not the kind of labour that they are going to cut down. They are going to cut down productive labour -- builders and gardeners -- and they are going to ruin their property so that it shall not be taxed. All I can say is this -- the ownership of land is not merely an enjoyment, it is a stewardship. It has been reckoned as such in the past, and if they cease to discharge their functions, the security and defence of the country, looking after the broken in their villages and neighbourhoods -- then those functions which are part of the traditional duties attached to the ownership of land and which have given to it its title -- if they cease to discharge those functions, the time will come to reconsider the conditions under which land is held in this country. No country, however rich, can permanently afford to have quartered upon its revenue a class which declines to do the duty which it was called upon to perform. And, therefore, it is one of the prime duties of statesmanship to investigate those conditions.

But I do not believe it. They have threatened and menaced like that before. They have seen it is not to their interest to carry out these futile menaces. They are now protesting against paying their fair share of the taxation of the land, and they are doing so by saying: 'You are burdening the community; you are putting burdens upon the people which they cannot bear.' Ah! they are not thinking of themselves. Noble souls! It is not the great dukes they are feeling for; it is the market gardener, it is the builder, and it was, until recently, the small holder. In every debate in the House of Commons they said: 'We are not worrying for ourselves. We can afford it with our broad acres; but just think of the little man who has got a few acres,' and we were so very impressed with this tearful appeal that at last we said, 'We will leave him out.' And I almost expected to see Mr Prettyman jump over the table and say, 'Fall on my neck and embrace me.' Instead of that, he stiffened up, his face wreathed with anger, and he said, 'The budget is more unjust than ever.'

`<?pagebreak number="28" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p28}Oh! no. We are placing the burdens on the broad shoulders. Why should I put burdens on the people? I am one of the children of the people. I was brought up amongst them. I know their trials; and God forbid that I should add one grain of trouble to the anxiety which they bear with such patience and fortitude. When the Prime Minister did me the honour of inviting me to take charge of the national exchequer at a time of great difficulty, I made up my mind in framing the budget which was in front of me that at any rate no cupboard should be bared, no lot would be harder to bear. By that test, I challenge them to judge the budget.

[•]{.center}
