## David Lloyd George Caernarvon, 9 December 1909 {#chapter004.html_pen0000296 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'We are in for rough weather' {#chapter004.html_pen0000300 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Lloyd George made many speeches on his People's Budget. After Limehouse, where he attacked dukes with their leaseholds of ever-increasing value, he spoke in Newcastle, where he said that fully equipped dukes, who cost as much to keep up as two Dreadnoughts, were just as great a terror and lasted longer. 'The question will be asked: "Should 500 men, ordinary men, chosen accidentally from among the unemployed, override the judgement, the deliberate judgement, of millions of people who are engaged in the industry which makes the wealth of the country?" ' At Wolverhampton, he again attacked the hereditary principle.*
>
> *At Caernarvon in Wales at the end of the year, there was a superb peroration to his speech, in which he set out his case for the betterment of the people.*

These are the taxes, these are our proposals. What do our opponents object to? Where is the Socialism, injustice and wrong? Where is the oppression; where is the unfairness of it? Do they object to what we are spending the money for? They do not complain about our building Dreadnoughts; they want more, except that they want someone else to pay for them. Do they object to pensions? What do they object to? Is it unfair to raise money for these purposes? We are imposing no `<?pagebreak number="29" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p29}burdens upon the earnings of any working man. The vast majority -- I am sure whole -- of the middle class of this country escape additional burdens. We put no burden upon the necessities of life of anyone. We are taxing the surplus. We are taxing the luxuries. If a man has enough after maintaining his wife and family, and can spare something upon whisky and tobacco, why should he not afterwards contribute towards the pensions and defences of the country? No; we are raising money by means that make it no more difficult for men to live, we are raising it for making provision for hundreds of thousands of workmen in the country who have nothing between them and starvation in old age except the charity of the parish. We propose a great scheme in order to set up a fund in this country that will see that no man suffers hunger in the dark days of sickness, breakdown in health, and unemployment which visit so many of us. That is what we are going to do. These schemes for the betterment of the people, we shall get them some day. We cannot get them without effort, and they will not be worth getting without effort. Freedom does not descend like manna from Heaven. It has been won step by step, by tramping the wilderness, fighting enemies, crossing Jordan, and clearing Jebusites out of the land. I do not regret that we cannot obtain these blessings except by fighting. The common people have taken no step that was worth taking without effort, sacrifice and suffering.

I cannot pretend to regret this conflict with which we are now confronted. It is well that democracies should now and again engage in these great struggles for a wider freedom and a higher life. They represent stages in the advance of the people from the bondage of the past to the blessings of the future. Those who dread these political convulsions, who apprehend from them nothing but destruction and danger, have read their history in vain. The race has nothing to fear except from stagnation. Against our will we have been precipitated into this tumult. For all that, we mean to win our way through it to a better time. The people may not secure all they seek, but if they bear themselves manfully they will achieve other ends they dare not even hope for now. Yesterday I visited the old village where I was brought up. I wandered through the woods familiar to my boyhood. There I saw a child gathering sticks for firewood, and I thought of `<?pagebreak number="30" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p30}the hours which I spent in the same pleasant and profitable occupation, for I also have been something of a 'backwoodsman'. And there is one experience taught me then which is of use to me today. I learnt as a child that it was little use going into the woods after a period of calm and fine weather, for I generally returned empty-handed; but after a great storm I always came back with an armful. We are in for rough weather. We may be even in for a winter of storms which will rock the forest, break many a withered branch, and leave many a rotten tree torn up by the roots. But when the weather clears, you may depend upon it that there will be something brought within the reach of the people that will give warmth and glow to their grey lives, something that will help to dispel the hunger, the despair, the oppression, and the wrong which now chill so many of their hearts.

[•]{.center}
