## Theodore Roosevelt Osawatomie, Kansas, 1910 {#chapter004.html_pen0000309 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The new nationalism' {#chapter004.html_pen0000313 .EB10SmallHead}

> *After becoming president of the United States on the assassination of President McKinley in 1901, Theodore Roosevelt won the election of 1904 with an overwhelming majority, but withdrew from politics in 1908 for a two-year world tour and went big-game hunting in Africa.*
>
> *On his return be tried to re-enter politics. The 'New Nationalism' he now preached not only embraced most of the political and social reforms of the moment but also accepted as both 'inevitable and necessary' the concentration of economic power in big corporations. Roosevelt would regulate rather than dissolve them, maintaining instead of destroying their contributions to America's wealth. Big business would be matched by big government.*
>
> *This was the programme that he presented in his speech at Osawatomie, Kansas, in August 1910.*

We come here today to commemorate one of the epoch-making events of the long struggle for the rights of man, the long struggle `<?pagebreak number="31" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p31}for the uplift of humanity. Our country -- this great republic -- means nothing unless it means the triumph of a real democracy, the triumph of popular government, and, in the long run, of an economic system under which each man shall be guaranteed the opportunity to show the best that there is in him. That is why the history of America is now the central feature of the history of the world; for the world has set its face hopefully towards our democracy; and, O my fellow citizens, each one of you carries on your shoulders not only the burden of doing well for the sake of your own country, but the burden of doing well and seeing that this nation does well for the sake of mankind ...

At many stages in the advance of humanity, conflict between the men who possess more than they have earned and the men who have earned more than they possess is the central condition of progress. In our day it appears as the struggle of free men to gain and hold the right of self-government as against the special interests, who twist the methods of free government into machinery for defeating the popular will. At every stage, and under all circumstances, the essence of the struggle is to equalize opportunity, destroy privilege, and give to the life and citizenship of every individual the highest possible value both to himself and to the commonwealth ...

Practical equality of opportunity for all citizens, when we achieve it, will have two great results. First, every man will have a fair chance to make of himself all that in him lies; to reach the highest point to which his capacities, unassisted by special privilege of his own and unhampered by the special privilege of others, can carry him, and to get for himself and his family substantially what he has earned. Second, equality of opportunity means that the commonwealth will get from every citizen the highest service of which he is capable. No man who carries the burden of the special privileges of another can give to the commonwealth that service to which it is fairly entitled ...

National efficiency has many factors. It is a necessary result of the principle of conservation widely applied. In the end it will determine our failure or success as a Nation. National efficiency has to do, not only with natural resources and with men, but it is equally concerned `<?pagebreak number="32" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p32}with institutions. The State must be made efficient for the work which concerns only the people of the State; and the Nation for that which concerns all the people. There must remain no neutral ground to serve as a refuge for lawbreakers, and especially for lawbreakers of great wealth, who can hire the vulpine legal cunning which will teach them how to avoid both jurisdictions. It is a misfortune when the national legislature fails to do its duty in providing a national remedy, so that the only national activity is the purely negative activity of the judiciary in forbidding the state to exercise power in the premises ...

The American people are right in demanding that New Nationalism, without which we cannot hope to deal with new problems. The New Nationalism puts the national need before sectional or personal advantage. It is impatient of the utter confusion that results from local legislatures attempting to treat national issues as local issues. It is still more impatient of the impotence which springs from overdivision of governmental powers, the impotence which makes it possible for local selfishness or for legal cunning, hired by wealthy special interests, to bring national activities to a deadlock. This New Nationalism regards the executive power as the steward of the public welfare. It demands of the judiciary that it shall be interested primarily in human welfare rather than in property, just as it demands that the representative body shall represent all the people rather than any one class or section of the people ...

The object of government is the welfare of the people. The material progress and prosperity of a nation are desirable chiefly so far as they lead to the moral and material welfare of all citizens. Just in proportion as the average man and woman are honest, capable of sound judgement and high ideals, active in public affairs -- but, first of all, sound in their home life, and the father and mother of healthy children whom they bring up well -- just so far, and no further, we may count our civilization a success. We must have -- I believe we have already -- a genuine and permanent moral awakening, without which no wisdom of legislation or administration really means anything; and, on the other hand, we must try to secure the social and economic legislation without which any improvement due to purely moral agitation is necessarily evanescent ... No matter how honest `<?pagebreak number="33" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p33}and decent we are in our private lives, if we do not have the right kind of law and the right kind of administration of the law, we cannot go forward as a nation. That is imperative; but it must be an addition to, and not a substitution for, the qualities that make up good citizens. In the last analysis, the most important elements in any man's career must be the sum of those qualities which, in the aggregate, we speak of as character. If he has not got it, then no law that the wit of man can devise, no administration of the law by the boldest and strongest executive, will avail to help him. We must have the right kind of character -- character that makes a man, first of all, a good man in the home, a good father, a good husband -- that makes a man a good neighbour. You must have that, and, then, in addition, you must have the kind of law and the kind of administration of the law which will give to those qualities in the private citizen the best possible chance for development. The prime problem of our nation, is to get the right type of good citizenship, and, to get it, we must have progress, and our public men must be genuinely progressive.

> *After failing to win the Republican nomination against William Taft, the incumbent president, in 1912, Roosevelt stood as an independent progressive candidate. He polled more votes than Taft but split the vote and allowed Woodrow Wilson to win.*

[•]{.center}
