## Edward Carson London, 11 February 1914 {#chapter004.html_pen0000350 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'Ulster is asking to be let alone' {#chapter004.html_pen0000354 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Edward Carson, born and educated in Dublin, was Unionist MP for Dublin for twenty-six years before becoming MP for a Belfast seat, 1918--21. He was Solicitor-General in the administrations of Salisbury and Balfour. In 1910 he organized British resistance to Irish Home Rule and set up an Ulster Unionist Council in 1911. A year later he established the Ulster Volunteers, a private army of 80,000 men pledged to resist Home Rule.*
>
> *He was the most powerful defender of the interests of Ulster in the British House of Commons. As Asquith wrestled with the issue of Home Rule in `<?pagebreak number="38" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p38}1914, he had come to accept in some form the temporary exclusion of Ulster. He used the King's speech and the debate on the address to create a conciliatory atmosphere.*
>
> *'The event of the afternoon', Asquith wrote on 11 February, 'was Carson's speech. He followed a somewhat arid display by the Impeccable and was really very impressive. I wrote him a line of congratulation.'*

Ulster is not asking for concessions. Ulster is asking to be let alone. When you talk of concessions, what you really mean is, 'We want to lay down what is the minimum of wrong we can do to Ulster.' Let me tell you that the results of two years' delay and the treatment we have received during these two years have made your task and made our task far more difficult. You have driven these men to enter into a covenant for their mutual protection. No doubt you have laughed at their covenant. Have a good laugh at it now. Well, so far as I am concerned, I am not the kind of man who will go over to Ulster one day and say, 'Enter into a covenant', and go over next day and say, 'Break it.' But there is something more. You have insulted them. I do not say the Prime Minister has done so. I would be wrong if I were to say that he has done so. He has treated them seriously, but the large body of his colleagues in the rank and file of his party have taken every opportunity of jeering at these men, of branding them as braggarts and bluffers and cowards, and all the rest of it. Well, do not you see that having done that, these men can never go back, and never will go back, and allow these gibes and insults and sneers to prove true.

The Speech from the Throne talks of the fears of these men. Yes, they have, I think, genuine fears for their civil and religious liberty under the Bill, but do not imagine that that is all that these men are fighting for. They are fighting for a great principle, and a great ideal. They are fighting to stay under the Government which they were invited to come under, under which they have flourished, and under which they are content, and to refuse to come under a Government which they loathe and detest. Men do not make sacrifices or take up the attitude these men in Ulster have taken up on a question of detail or paper safeguards. I am not going to argue whether they are right or wrong in resisting. It would be useless to argue it, because they `<?pagebreak number="39" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter004.html_p39}have thoroughly made up their minds, but I say this: If these men are not morally justified when they are attempted to be driven out of one Government with which they are satisfied, and put under another which they loathe, I do not see how resistance ever can be justified in history at all ...

Believe me, whatever way you settle the Irish question, there are only two ways to deal with Ulster. It is for statesmen to say which is the best and right one. She is not a part of the community which can be bought. She will not allow herself to be sold. You must therefore either coerce her if you go on, or you must, in the long run, by showing that good government can come under the Home Rule Bill, try and win her over to the case of the rest of Ireland. You probably can coerce her -- though I doubt it. If you do, what will be the disastrous consequences not only to Ulster, but to this country and the Empire? Will my fellow countryman, the Leader of the Nationalist party, have gained anything? I will agree with him -- I do not believe he wants to triumph any more than I do. But will he have gained anything if he takes over these people and then applies for what he used to call -- at all events his party used to call -- the enemies of the people to come in and coerce them into obedience? No, Sir, one false step taken in relation to Ulster will, in my opinion, render for ever impossible a solution of the Irish question. I say this to my Nationalist fellow countrymen, and, indeed, also to the Government: you have never tried to win over Ulster. You have never tried to understand her position. You have never alleged, and can never allege, that this Bill gives her one atom of advantage. Nay, you cannot deny that it takes away many advantages that she has as a constituent part of the United Kingdom. You cannot deny that in the past she had produced the most loyal and law-abiding part of the citizens of Ireland. After all that, for these two years, every time we came before you your only answer to us -- the majority of you, at all events -- was to insult us, and to make little of us. I say to the leader of the Nationalist party, if you want Ulster, go and take her, or go and win her. You have never wanted her affections; you have wanted her taxes ...

[•]{.center}

[]{#chapter005.html}
