## Mahatma Gandhi Benares, 4 February 1916 {#chapter005.html_pen0000409 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'There is no salvation for India' {#chapter005.html_pen0000413 .EB10SmallHead}

> *As a barrister in South Africa from 1907 to 1914, Mohandas Gandhi conducted passive-resistance campaigns of protest at the Transvaal government's discrimination against its Indian minority settlers. He returned to India in 1915 and gradually emerged as leader of the Congress movement.*
>
> `<?pagebreak number="48" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter005.html_p48}*In September 1915, Mrs Annie Besant, a remarkable Englishwoman who had made India her home, announced the formation of a Home Rule League. Earlier, in 1892, she started a school in Benares which was expanded into the Hindu University Central College in 1916. An illustrious gathering of notables was there for the opening ceremonies, including the Viceroy and many bejewelled maharajas, maharanis, rajas and high officials in all their dazzling panoply.*
>
> *Gandhi addressed the meeting on 4 February. As the audience grew unruly and arguments broke out, it broke up before be could finish. 'India had never heard such a forthright, unvarnished speech,' says Louis Fisher, Gandhi's biographer. 'Gandhi spared no one, least of all those present. In 1916 the ear \[of India\] began to catch the voice of a man who was courageous and indiscreet, a little man who lived like a poor man and defended the poor to the face of the rich, a holy man in an ashram.'*

Our language is the reflection of ourselves, and if you tell me that our languages are too poor to express the best thought, then I say that the sooner we are wiped out of existence the better for us. Is there a man who dreams that English can ever become the national language of India? (*Cries of 'Never'.*) Why this handicap on the nation? Just consider for one moment what an unequal race our lads have to run with every English lad. I had the privilege of a close conversation with some Poona professors. They assured me that every Indian youth, because he reached his knowledge through the English language, lost at least six precious years of life. Multiply that by the number of students turned out by our schools and colleges, and find out for yourselves how many thousand years have been lost to the nation. The charge against us is that we have no initiative. How can we have any if we are to devote the precious years of our life to the mastery of a foreign tongue? ...

The only education we receive is English education. Surely we must show something for it. But suppose that we had been receiving during the past fifty years education through our vernaculars, what should we have today? We should have today a free India, we should have our educated men, not as if they were foreigners in their own land but speaking to the heart of the nation; they would be working amongst the poorest of the poor, and whatever they would have gained during the past fifty years would be a heritage for the nation. (*Applause* ...)

`<?pagebreak number="49" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter005.html_p49}His Highness the Maharajah who presided yesterday over our deliberations spoke about the poverty of India ... But what did we witness in the great pandal in which the foundation ceremony was performed by the Viceroy. Certainly a most gorgeous show, an exhibition of jewellery which made a splendid feast for the eyes of the greatest jeweller who chose to come from Paris. I compare with the richly bedecked noblemen the millions of the poor. And I feel like saying to these noblemen, 'There is no salvation for India unless you strip yourselves of this jewellery and hold it in trust for your countrymen in India.' (*'Hear, hear' and applause.*)

Sir, whenever I hear of a great palace rising in any great city of India, be it in British India or be it in India which is ruled by our great chiefs, I become jealous at once, and I say, 'Oh, it is the money that has come from the agriculturists.' Over seventy-five per cent of the population are agriculturists and Mr Higginbotham told us last night in his own felicitous language that they are the men who grow two blades of grass in the place of one. But there cannot be much spirit of self-government about us if we take away or allow others to take away from them almost the whole of the results of their labour. Our salvation can only come through the farmer. Neither the lawyers, nor the doctors, not the rich landlords are going to secure it ...

I was talking the other day to a member of the much-abused civil service. I have not very much in common with the members of that service, but I could not help admiring the manner in which he was speaking to me. He said: 'Mr Gandhi, do you for one moment suppose that all we, civil servants, are a bad lot, that we want to oppress the people whom we have come to govern?' 'No,' I said. 'Then if you get an opportunity put in a word for the much-abused civil service?' And I am here to put in that word. Yes, many members of the Indian civil service are most decidedly overbearing; they are tyrannical, at times thoughtless ...

But what does that signify? They were gentlemen before they came here, and if they have lost some of the moral fibre, it is a reflection upon ourselves. (*Cries of 'No'.*) Just think out for yourselves, if a man who was good yesterday has become bad after having come in contact with me, is he responsible that he has deteriorated or am I? The `<?pagebreak number="50" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter005.html_p50}atmosphere of sycophancy and falsity that surrounds them on their coming to India demoralizes them, as it would many of us. It is well to take the blame sometimes. If we are to receive self-government, we shall have to take it. We shall never be granted self-government. Look at the history of the British Empire and the British nation; freedom-loving as it is, it will not be a party to give freedom to a people who will not take it themselves.

[•]{.center}
