## Woodrow Wilson Washington, DC, 2 April 1917 {#chapter005.html_pen0000479 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The world must be made safe for democracy' {#chapter005.html_pen0000483 .EB10SmallHead}

> *When the First World War broke out, Woodrow Wilson immediately issued a proclamation of neutrality. Yet real neutrality was impossible for a nation so powerful as America, especially after the* Lusitania *with her 1,198 passengers, including 128 Americans, was sunk by a German torpedo in 1915. American opinion was appalled.*
>
> *Wilson sent strong notes of protest to Berlin and made a memorable speech in which he proclaimed: 'There is no such thing as a man being too proud to fight. There is no such thing as a nation being so right that it does not need to convince others by force that it is right.'*
>
> *In 1916 Wilson was re-elected president by a slender majority. He directed a note to the belligerent governments offering an honourable excuse to start negotiations. After this tactic failed, be delivered an address to Congress on 'Peace without victory'. The announcement that Germany was resorting to unrestricted submarine warfare -- that all Allied or neutral vessels in the Atlantic would be torpedoed without warning -- abruptly destroyed Wilson's dream.*
>
> `<?pagebreak number="60" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter005.html_p60}*One month after his second inaugural address, he went before a joint session of Congress to ask for a declaration that a state of war existed between Germany and the United States -- and got what he wanted by a nearly unanimous vote on* 6 *April, Good Friday.*

With a profound sense of the solemn and even tragical character of the step I am taking and of the grave responsibilities which it involves, but in unhesitating obedience to what I deem my constitutional duty, I advise that the Congress declare the recent course of the imperial German government to be in fact nothing less than war against the government and people of the United States; that it formally accept the status of belligerent which has thus been thrust upon it; and that it take immediate steps not only to put the country in a more thorough state of defence, but also to exert all its power and employ all its resources to bring the government of the German Empire to terms and end the war ...

We are accepting this challenge of hostile purpose because we know that in such a government, following such methods, we can never have a friend; and that in the presence of its organized power, always lying in wait to accomplish we know not what purpose, there can be no assured security for the democratic governments of the world. We are now about to accept the gage of battle with this natural foe to liberty and shall, if necessary, spend the whole force of the nation to check and nullify its pretensions and its power. We are glad, now that we see the facts with no veil of false pretence about them, to fight thus for the ultimate peace of the world and for the liberation of its peoples, the German peoples included: for the rights of nations great and small and the privilege of men everywhere to choose their way of life and of obedience. The world must be made safe for democracy. Its peace must be planted upon the tested foundations of political liberty. We have no selfish ends to serve. We desire no conquest, no dominion. We seek no indemnities for ourselves, no material compensation for the sacrifices we shall freely make. We are but one of the champions of the rights of mankind. We shall be satisfied when those rights have been made as secure as the faith and the freedom of nations can make them.

`<?pagebreak number="61" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter005.html_p61}Just because we fight without rancour and without selfish object, seeking nothing for ourselves but what we shall wish to share with all free peoples, we shall, I feel confident, conduct our operations as belligerents without passion and ourselves observe with proud punctilio the principles of right and of fair play we profess to be fighting for ...

It will be all the easier for us to conduct ourselves as belligerents in a high spirit of right and fairness because we act without animus, not in enmity toward a people or with the desire to bring any injury or disadvantage upon them, but only in armed opposition to an irresponsible government which has thrown aside all considerations of humanity and of right and is running amuck. We are, let me say again, the sincere friends of the German people, and shall desire nothing so much as the early re-establishment of intimate relations of mutual advantage between us -- however hard it may be for them, for the time being, to believe that this is spoken from our hearts. We have borne with their present government through all these bitter months because of that friendship -- exercising a patience and forbearance which would otherwise have been impossible. We shall, happily, still have an opportunity to prove that friendship in our daily attitude and actions toward the millions of men and women of German birth and native sympathy who live amongst us and share our life, and we shall be proud to prove it toward all who are in fact loyal to their neighbours and to the government in the hour of test. They are, most of them, as true and loyal Americans as if they had never known any other fealty or allegiance. They will be prompt to stand with us in rebuking and restraining the few who may be of a different mind and purpose. If there should be disloyalty, it will be dealt with with a firm hand of stern repression; but, if it lifts its head at all, it will lift it only here and there and without countenance except from a lawless and malignant few.

It is a distressing and oppressive duty, gentlemen of the Congress, which I have performed in thus addressing you. There are, it may be, many months of fiery trial and sacrifice ahead of us. It is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war, into the most terrible and disastrous of all wars, civilization itself seeming to be in the `<?pagebreak number="62" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter005.html_p62}balance. But the right is more precious than peace, and we shall fight for the things which we have always carried nearest our hearts -- for democracy, for the right of those who submit to authority to have a voice in their own governments, for the dominion of right by such a concert of free peoples as shall bring peace and safety to all nations and make the world itself at last free. To such a task we can dedicate our lives and our fortunes, everything that we are and everything that we have, with the pride of those who know that the day has come when America is privileged to spend her blood and her might for the principles that gave her birth and happiness and the peace which she has treasured. God helping her, she can do no other.

> *Wilson's address set the United States on a new course; armed neutrality was impracticable and the world must be made safe for democracy. He was rewarded with tumultuous cheers. They were no comfort. 'My message today was a message of death for our young men,' he said afterwards. 'How strange it seems to applaud that.'*

[•]{.center}
