## Alfred E. Smith New York, 29 October 1919 {#chapter005.html_pen0000644 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'A man as low and mean as I can picture' {#chapter005.html_pen0000648 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Al Smith, a Roman Catholic who left school at fourteen, was a New York Democrat politician who became governor in 1919. At Tammany Hall he gathered round him a generation of equally remarkable younger men and women, including Harry Hopkins, Frances Perkins, Robert Moses and Franklin Delano Roosevelt, and instituted honest government.*
>
> *At the mass meeting in Carnegie Hall at which this speech was made, Smith(1873--1944) made an irreparable break with William Randolph Hearst, the powerful owner of a newspaper chain extending from New York to California and the newspaper baron on whom Citizen Kane was based. Hearst had combined with Tammany Hall to elect the local administration but had been scurrilously attacking the governor for 'starving' children because he refused to reduce the price of milk.*
>
> *Smith had expected to debate with Hearst at the meeting called by a citizens' committee but Hearst refused to meet him. Smith's speech therefore meant that he had decided to fight the influence of one of the richest of men, who used his newspapers to wield power.*
>
> *He asked for absolute silence and attention. 'I feel that I am here tonight upon a mission as important not only to myself but to this city, to this state and to this country as I could possibly perform.' As he reached his peroration, he `<?pagebreak number="82" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter005.html_p82}declared that nearly every paper had commended his administration except the paper that belonged to the man who wanted to tell him what he ought to do. Then he launched his assault on America's most powerful newspaper mogul.*

I cannot think of a more contemptible man -- my power of imagination fails me to bring into my mind's eye a more despicable man than the man that exploits the poor. Any man that leads you to believe that your lot in life is not all right, any man that conjures up for you a fancied grievance against your government or against the man at the head of it, to help himself, is breeding the seeds of an anarchy and a dissatisfaction more disastrous to the welfare of the community than any other teaching that I can think of, because, at least, the wildest anarchist, the most extreme Socialist, the wildest radical that you can think of, may at least be sincere in his own heart. He may think that it is right when he preaches it. But the man that preaches to the poor of this or of any other community discontent and dissatisfaction to help himself and to make good his side of the argument, and to destroy, as he said himself he would, the Governor of the State, is a man as low and as mean as I can picture ... Follow back the history of this man's newspapers since he came to this part of the country, and you will have to read out of his newspapers this remarkable fact: that in this great democracy, in this land of the free and in this home of the brave, there has never been a man elected to office yet that has not been tainted in some way. If the Hearst newspapers were the text books for the children of our schools, they would have to spell out of its every line that no man can be trusted in this country after he is put into public office; that no man thinks enough about it; no man has enough of regard for it; no man has enough of real Christian charity to do the thing right; no man that ever held great public office had enough of respect and regard for his mother and his wife and his children and his friends to be right in office. About that there can be no question, because no public man in this State, from Grover Cleveland right down to today, has ever escaped this fellow. We all know that. The children on the street know it.

Nobody that ever went to the Governor's office went there with `<?pagebreak number="83" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter005.html_p83}a graver sense of the responsibility of that office than I did. What could there possibly be about me that I should be assailed in this reckless manner by this man? I have more reason probably than any man I will meet tonight to have a strong love and a strong devotion for this country, for this State, and for this city. Look at what I have received at its hands: I left school and went to work before I was fifteen years of age. I worked hard, night and day; I worked honestly and conscientiously at every job that I was ever put at, until I went to the Governor's chair in Albany. What can it be? It has got to be jealousy, it has got to be envy, it has got to be hatred, or it has to be something that nobody understands, that makes me come down here, into the city of New York, before this audience, and urge them to organize in this city to stay the danger that comes from these papers, to the end that the health, and welfare, and the comfort of this people, of the people of this State, may be promoted, and we may get rid of this pestilence that walks in the darkness.

> *Smith was governor of New York for a second term from 1923 to 1929. At the 1924 Democratic convention he was beaten for the presidential nomination after 103 ballots. He gained the nomination in 1928 but was beaten by Herbert Hoover.*

[•]{.center}
