## Clarence Darrow Detroit, 19 May 1926 {#chapter005.html_pen0000738 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The life of the Negro race has been a life of tragedy' {#chapter005.html_pen0000742 .EB10SmallHead}

> *More than a hundred clients of Clarence Darrow* *(1857*--*1938)* *were accused of murder but none was executed. For forty years, the Chicago attorney, a militant `<?pagebreak number="97" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter005.html_p97}agnostic, fanatical humanitarian and spokesman for the underdog, dominated hundreds of courtrooms.*
>
> *He resigned as general counsel for the Chicago and Northwestern Railway in 1894 to defend Eugene Debs during the Pullman strike. Debs was acquitted and Darrow subsequently became involved in a series of important or sensational cases.*
>
> *In 1926 some 60,000 blacks in Chicago lived in overcrowded quarters. They were so crowded that some families had moved to the white districts but were regularly driven out. One was Dr Ossian Sweet, who provided himself with guns and ammunition and fired a volley into the street when a big crowd attacked his home. One white man was killed. Sweet and eleven blacks were arrested and Darrow became lawyer for the defence. The jurors could not agree and were dismissed.*
>
> *A month later the state ordered a retrial, making Henry Sweet, the doctor's brother, who had apparently fired the fatal shot, the sole defendant. Darrow's final plea for Sweet, which lasted eight hours, was perhaps the best appeal to a jury of a brilliant career. Sweet was acquitted.*
>
> *For Darrow the verdict meant simply that the doctrine that a man's house is his castle applied to blacks as well as whites -- probably the first occasion on which that principle had been upheld by a white jury.*

We come now to lay this man's case in the hands of a jury of our peers -- the first defence and the last defence is the protection of home and life as provided by our law. We are willing to leave it here. I feel, as I look at you, that we will be treated fairly and decently, even understandingly and kindly. You know what this case is. You know why it is. You know that if white men had been fighting their way against coloured men, nobody would ever have dreamed of a prosecution. And you know that from the beginning of this case to the end, up to the time you write your verdict, the prosecution is based on race prejudice and nothing else.

Gentlemen, I feel deeply on this subject; I cannot help it. Let us take a little glance at the history of the Negro race. It seems to me that the story would melt hearts of stone. I was born in America. I could have left it if I had wanted to go away. Some other men, reading about this land of freedom that we brag about on the Fourth of July, came voluntarily to America. These men, the defendants, are `<?pagebreak number="98" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter005.html_p98}here because they could not help it. Their ancestors were captured in the jungles and on the plains of Africa, captured as you capture wild beasts, torn from their homes and their kindred; loaded into slave ships, packed like sardines in a box, half of them dying on the ocean passage; some jumping into the sea in their frenzy, when they had a chance to choose death in place of slavery. They were captured and brought there. They could not help it. They were bought and sold as slaves, to work without pay, because they were black. They were subject to all of this for generations, until finally they were given their liberty, so far as the law goes -- and that is only a little way, because, after all, every human being's life in this world is inevitably mixed with every other life and, no matter what laws we pass, no matter what precautions we take, unless the people we meet are kindly and decent and human and liberty-loving then there is no liberty. Freedom comes from human beings, rather than from laws and institutions.

Now, that is their history. These people are the children of slavery. If the race that we belong to owes anything to any human being, or to any power in the universe, they owe it to these black men. Above all other men, they owe an obligation and a duty to these black men that can never be repaid. I never see one of them that I do not feel I ought to pay part of the debt of my race -- and if you gentlemen feel as you should feel in this case, your emotions will be like mine.

Gentlemen, you are called into this case by chance. It took us a week to find you, a week of culling out prejudice and hatred. Probably we did not cull it all out at that; but we took the best and the fairest that we could find. It is up to you.

Your verdict means something in this case. It means something more than the fate of this boy. It is not often that a case is submitted to twelve men where the decision may mean a milestone in the history of the human race. But this case does. And I hope and I trust that you have a feeling of responsibility that will make you take it and do your duty as citizens of a great nation, and as members of the human family, which is better still.

Let me say just a parting word for Henry Sweet, who has wellnigh been forgotten. I am serious, but it seems almost like a reflection `<?pagebreak number="99" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter005.html_p99}upon this jury to talk as if I doubted your verdict. What has this boy done? This one boy now that I am culling out from all of the rest, and whose fate is in your hands -- can you tell me what he has done? Can I believe myself? Am I standing in a court of justice where twelve men on their oaths are asked to take away the liberty of a boy twenty-one years of age, who has done nothing more than what Henry Sweet has done?

Gentlemen, you may think he shot too quick; you may think he erred in judgement; you may think that Dr Sweet should not have gone there prepared to defend his home. But, what of this case of Henry Sweet? What has he done? I want to put it up to you, each one of you, individually. Dr Sweet was his elder brother. He had helped Henry through school. He loved him. He had taken him into his home. Henry had lived with him and his wife; he had fondled his baby. The doctor had promised Henry the money to go through school. Henry was getting his education, to take his place in the world, gentlemen -- and this is a hard job. With his brother's help he has worked his way through college up to the last year. The doctor had bought a home. He feared danger. He moved in with his wife and he asked this boy to go with him. And this boy went to defend his brother, and his brother's wife and his child and his home.

Do you think more of him or less of him for that? I never saw twelve men in my life -- and I have looked at a good many faces of a good many juries -- I never saw twelve men in my life that, if you could get them to understand a human case, were not true and right.

Should this boy have gone along and helped his brother? Or, should he have stayed away? What would you have done? And yet, gentlemen, here is a boy, and the president of his college came all the way from Ohio to tell you what he thinks of him. His teachers have come here, from Ohio, to tell you what they think of him. The Methodist bishop has come here to tell you what he thinks of him.

So, gentlemen, I am justified in saying that this boy is as kindly, as well disposed, as decent a man as one of you twelve. Do you think he ought to be taken out of his school and sent to the penitentiary? All right, gentlemen, if you think so, do it. It's your job, not mine. If you think so, do it. But if you do, gentlemen, if you should ever look `<?pagebreak number="100" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter005.html_p100}into the face of your own boy, or your own brother, or look into your own heart, you will regret it in sackcloth and ashes. You know, if he committed any offence, it was being loyal and true to his brother whom he loved. I know where you will send him and it will not be to a penitentiary.

I do not believe in the law of hate. I may not be true to my ideals always, but I believe in the law of love, and I believe you can do nothing with hatred. I would like to see a time when man loves his fellow man and forgets his colour or his creed. We will never be civilized until that time comes. I know the Negro race has a long road to go. I believe that the life of the Negro race has been a life of tragedy, of injustice, of oppression. The law has made him equal, but man has not. And, after all, the last analysis is: what has man done? -- and not what has the law done? I know there is a long road ahead of him before he can take the place which I believe he should take. I know that before him there is sorrow, tribulation, and death among the blacks, and perhaps the whites. I am sorry. I would do what I could to avert it. I would advise patience; I would advise tolerance; I would advise understanding; I would advise all those things which are necessary for men who live together.

Gentlemen, what do you think of your duty in this case? I have watched day after day these black, tense faces that have crowded this court. These black faces that now are looking to you twelve whites, feeling that the hopes and fears of a race are in your keeping.

This case is about to end, gentlemen. To them, it is life. Not one of their colour sits on this jury. Their fate is in the hands of twelve whites. Their eyes are fixed on you, their hearts go out to you, and their hopes hang on your verdict.

This is all. I ask you, on behalf of this defendant, on behalf of these helpless ones who turn to you, and more than that -- on behalf of this great state, and this great city, which must face this problem and face it fairly -- I ask you in the name of progress and of the human race, to return a verdict of not guilty in this case!

[•]{.center}

[]{#chapter006.html}
