## Oswald Mosley London, 28 May 1930 {#chapter007.html_pen0000811 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The nation has to be mobilized' {#chapter007.html_pen0000815 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Oswald Mosley* *(1896*--*1980)* *was one of the most tragic personalities of twentieth-century British politics, a charismatic Labour politician who became a figure of ridicule after he founded the British Union of Fascists, which promoted anti-Semitic and Hitlerite policies in the 1930s.*
>
> *Sitting initially in the House of Commons as an independent MP, he joined the Labour Party in 1924 and entered Ramsay MacDonald's government in 1929. Mosley wanted to solve the Depression by stimulating foreign trade and pumping public funds into industrial projects to create jobs.*
>
> *The proposals were rejected by the Cabinet. Mosley's resignation speech to parliament was considered as one of the most outstanding oratorical performances of the century. Its admirers included both Lloyd George and Winston Churchill.*

We have to face up to this fact, that if men are to be employed on any large scale that employment has to be paid for either by the State or by local authorities. There is a tremendous struggle, an incessant struggle, going on in every Government department to put every penny they can off the taxpayer and on to the ratepayer. What holds up these plans for months is the struggle for these pennies, these minor details. What does it matter? What is the use of shifting the `<?pagebreak number="108" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter007.html_p108}burden from the taxpayer to the ratepayer? What is the use of lifting the burden from the right shoulder to the left? It is the same man who has to carry it, and the economic fact is this, as the Colwyn and every other authoritative inquiry upon the economic side has said, that the burden on the ratepayer is more onerous upon industry than the burden upon the taxpayer. If this burden has to be carried, need we struggle and waste time in deciding whether it is to be carried by the taxpayer or by the ratepayer? ...

If you are pursuing a deflation policy, restricting the whole basis of credit, there is some force in what is known as the Treasury view, that it is difficult to raise large loans for such purposes as this.

Given, however, a financial policy of stabilization, that Treasury point of view cannot hold water. It would mean that every single new enterprise is going to put as many men out of employment as it will employ. That is a complete absurdity if you pursue that argument to its logical conclusion. If it is true it means that nothing can ever be done by the Government or by Parliament. It means that no Government has any function or any purpose; it is a policy of complete surrender. It has been said rather curiously, in view of the modesty of my programme, that it is the policy of the 'red flag'. I might reply that what is known as the Treasury view is the policy of the 'white' flag. It is a policy of surrender, of negation, by which any policy can be frustrated and blocked in this country.

Hanging all over that policy is the great conception of conversion. There are two ways of achieving conversion. One through the inherent financial strength of your position, leading to a strengthening of Government credit. The other is by the simple process of deflation to make all industrial investments unprofitable and drive your investor into Government securities because he has no other profitable outlet. But there may be another effect of that policy; that the money goes abroad, and then you get the local effect of that policy suggested by the President of the Board of Trade as the only means of solving our industrial problems, when he said on the 14th May: 'During the past fortnight alone £16,000,000 of new capital has been authorized or raised for overseas investment, and so I trust the process will continue.'

`<?pagebreak number="109" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter007.html_p109}Why? Why is it so right and proper and desirable that capital should go overseas to equip factories to compete against us, to build roads and railways in the Argentine or in Timbuctoo, to provide employment for people in those countries while it is supposed to shake the whole basis of our financial strength if anyone dares to suggest the raising of money by the Government of this country to provide employment for the people of this country? If those views are passed without examination or challenge the position of this country is serious indeed. In conclusion let me say that the situation which faces us is, of course, very serious. Everybody knows that; and perhaps those who have been in office for a short time know it even better. It is not, I confidently believe, irreparable, but I feel this from the depths of my being, that the days of muddling through are over, that this time we cannot muddle through.

This nation has to be mobilized and rallied for a tremendous effort, and who can do that except the Government of the day? If that effort is not made we may soon come to crisis, to a real crisis. I do not fear that so much, for this reason, that in a crisis this nation is always at its best. This people knows how to handle a crisis, it cools their heads and steels their nerves. What I fear much more than a sudden crisis is a long, slow, crumbling through the years until we sink to the level of a Spain, a gradual paralysis beneath which all the vigour and energy of this country will succumb. That is a far more dangerous thing, and far more likely to happen unless some effort is made. If the effort is made how relatively easily can disaster be averted. You have in this country resources, skilled craftsmen among the workers, design and technique among the technicians, unknown and unequalled in any other country in the world. What a fantastic assumption it is that a nation which within the lifetime of everyone has put forth efforts of energy and vigour unequalled in the history of the world, should succumb before an economic situation such as the present. If the situation is to be overcome, if the great powers of this country are to be rallied and mobilized for a great national effort, then the Government and Parliament must give a lead. I beg the Government tonight to give the vital forces of this country the chance that they await. I beg Parliament to give that lead.

> `<?pagebreak number="110" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter007.html_p110}*Mosley carried his fight to the Labour Party conference that autumn but was again defeated by MacDonald. In December he published the* Mosley Manifesto, *which was backed by seventeen Labour* MP*s, but he was expelled after founding the progressive socialist New Party.*
>
> *Mosley was ruined politically and his ideas were ruined with him. A. J. P. Taylor describes the rejection of Mosley's programme as a decisive, though negative, event in British history, the moment when the British people resolved to stand on the ancient ways.*

[•]{.center}
