## Ramsay MacDonald Llandudno, 7 October 1930 {#chapter007.html_pen0000832 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'We are not on trial' {#chapter007.html_pen0000836 .EB10SmallHead}

> *With Keir Hardie, Ramsay MacDonald* *(1856*--*1937)* *was one of the main founders of the British Labour Party. He became an* MP *in 1906, led the parliamentary Labour Party from 1911, but opposed the First World War and lost his seat in 1918. On re-election in 1922, he again led the party, briefly formed a minority Labour government in 1924 and was again prime minister from 1929.*
>
> *Confronted by prolonged unemployment and a growing budget deficit, MacDonald's government was beset by economic crisis. Feelers were put out by Lloyd George for a coalition government. The annual Labour Party conference in 1930 met not only against this worsening economic background but also on the day after the R101 airship crash in which forty-eight people died, including Lord Thomson, MacDonald's closest friend in politics.*
>
> *At the start of his speech, MacDonald paid an emotional tribute to the dead. Then he straightened himself up and launched into a passionate defence of the government and its record.*

The Government has fulfilled the confidence that you reposed in it at the last Election. (*Cheers.*) I have no apologies -- none whatever. I am not one of those who, standing aside, imagine that pettifogging criticism is either helpful or illuminating. Not at all. The plough, my `<?pagebreak number="111" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter007.html_p111}friends, is in the furrow, and the place for you and me is in the furrow dragging the plough. (*Cheers.*) We have not fulfilled all our pledges -- no. Did you expect us to do so? Our pledges are the pledges of men and women who are Socialists, our pledges are the pledges of men and women who know that this system of society cannot and will not work smoothly, and that the great task of statesmen of vision is to transform that system of society from the 'is' until it has become the 'is to be'; and in the course of that transformation, rightly or wrongly, my creed, and, I think, the creed of the great majority, if not all of my colleagues, has been evolution -- evolution applied in precisely the same way as the scientific medical man, the scientific healer, applies his knowledge and his art to the frail and the ailing body. He does not prescribe straightaway the final food, the final exercise, the final standard of life, but being a knowing man, a man with an eye, a man not only with scientific knowledge but psychological knowledge, a man who knows how to lead gently and truly as well as to feed accurately, knowing his problem, knowing that it is not a problem of mathematics, not a problem of material things only, but a problem of mental and psychological things, works out a great policy and goes on with it from stage to stage. The men who remain out may say: 'You have not got to your journey's end,' but the men who remain in say, 'No, we have not, but we are going to get there.' (*Cheers ...*)

It is not the Labour Government that is on trial; it is Capitalism that is being tried. We told you in those days that the time would come when finance would be more powerful than industry. That day has come. We told you in those days that people would say: 'Trade is all right, but finance is all wrong.' That day has come. We told you in those days that the time would come when the man who went into the workshop and into the factory, and his employer as well, would no longer be in the simple relationship of master and man, but that the master would become impersonal, and that powers that have nothing to do with industry would control industry -- the powers of gambling with credit. That day has come ...

So, my friends, we are not on trial; it is the system under which we live. It has broken down, not only in this little island, it has broken `<?pagebreak number="112" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter007.html_p112}down in Europe, in Asia, in America; it has broken down everywhere, as it was bound to break down. And the cure, the new path, the new idea is organization -- organization which will protect life, not property; organization which may protect property, but protect property in proper relation to life; organization which will see to it that when science discovers and inventors invent, the class that will be crushed down by reason of knowledge shall not be the working class, but the loafing class. That is the policy that we are going to pursue slowly, steadily, persistently, with knowledge, and with our minds working upon a plan. And I appeal to you, my friends, today, with all that is going on outside -- I appeal to you to go back on to your Socialist faith. Do not mix that up with pettifogging patching, either of a Poor Law kind or of Relief Work kind. Construction, ideas, architecture, building line upon line, stone upon stone, storey upon storey: it will not be your happiness, it will certainly not be mine, to see that fabric finished. It will not be your happiness, and it will certainly not be mine, to see that every stone laid in sincerity has been well laid. But I think it will be your happiness, as it is mine, to go on convinced that the great foundations are being well laid, that the ennobling plan is being conceived, and that by skilled craftsmen, confident in each other's goodwill and sincerity, the temple will rise and rise and rise until at last it is complete, and the genius of humanity will find within it an appropriate resting place.

> *There was tumultuous applause. A later vote of censure was defeated by 1,800,000 votes to 330,000. A year later after a run on the pound, MacDonald formed a National Government with the Conservatives which the majority of Labour MPs refused to support. MacDonald was condemned as a traitor to socialism. Although he had towered over British politics in the 1920s, his reputation thereafter was doomed.*

[•]{.center}

[]{#chapter008.html}
