## Philip Snowden London, 17 October 1931 {#chapter008.html_pen0000871 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'Bolshevism run mad' {#chapter008.html_pen0000875 .EB10SmallHead}

> *The first National Government was formed by the Labour prime minister Ramsay MacDonald in August 1931. Most of the Labour Party went into opposition. The new government took Britain off the Gold Standard and decided to fight a general election against Labour.*
>
> `<?pagebreak number="116" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter008.html_p116}*As Labour Chancellor, Philip Snowden (1864--1937) had been forced to introduce deflationary measures to meet the British economic crisis. During the election he made this broadcast speech attacking his party and its new leader Arthur Henderson.*
>
> *Snowden's speech was regarded as the most decisive of the election and he was held responsible for preventing Labour's return to power until 1945. He was created a viscount in 1931.*

You have been told by a spokesman of the Labour Party this week that the resources of the country are enormous and that we have money enough to go on spending to our hearts' content. This is appalling ignorance or wilful deception. It is true the resources of the country are great; but the fact is that they cannot continue to be mortgaged for current expenditure ... The majority of the Labour Government, after agreeing to most of the economies, shirked the responsibility of placing the proposals before Parliament ... So the National Government was formed to deal with the situation. By drastic economies, and by heavy taxation spread fairly over the whole population, the Budget has been balanced. I know the economies we have had to make are disagreeable. It has been no pleasure to impose them. They were necessary to prevent a far more serious reduction in working-class conditions. They are far less drastic than reductions which the Labour Government of Australia has been compelled to make, and far less than the economies made in Germany. After the cuts have been made the unemployed in this country are far more generously provided for than in any other country. In America they are left to private charity or to beg or starve. After the reduction in unemployment pay the benefits are now 17 per cent more in value than the Labour Government in 1924 considered adequate, and at a time when there was a Budget surplus of £30,000,000 -- not a deficit of £170,000,000 ... There is no more stern and unbending Free Trader than I am ... The Labour Party is not a Free Trade Party ... A month ago the Trade Union Council was preparing a tariff policy. When the General Election became imminent they dropped that in order to pose as an anti-tariff party.

`<?pagebreak number="117" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter008.html_p117}Mr Henderson is quoted in the *Daily Herald* this morning as having said that if he were faced with a large cut in unemployment pay or a 20 per cent revenue tariff as an emergency expedient he was going to try the value of that expedient. Now he is denouncing tariffs as an expedient to raise prices and lower wages ...

I hope you have read the Election programme of the Labour Party. It is the most fantastic and impracticable programme ever put before the electors. All the derelict industries are to be taken over by the State, and the taxpayer is to shoulder the losses. The banks and financial houses are to be placed under national ownership and control, which means, I suppose, that they are to be run by a joint committee of the Labour Party and the Trade Union Council. Your investments are to be ordered by some board, and your foreign investments are to be mobilized to finance this madcap policy. This is not Socialism. It is Bolshevism run mad.

[•]{.center}
