## Adolf Hitler Düsseldorf, 27 January 1932 {#chapter008.html_pen0000886 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'An indomitable aggressive spirit' {#chapter008.html_pen0000890 .EB10SmallHead}

> *By 1932, Adolf Hitler (1889--1945) was within a year of becoming German chancellor. The greatest orator of the twentieth century, albeit allied to its most evil policies, Hitler had discovered his demagogic gifts in open-air tirades against Jews and the Treaty of Versailles after he joined the National Socialist German Workers' Party (the NSDAP, derisively nicknamed 'Nazi') in Munich in 1919. His failed putsch in 1923 won him national fame and imprisonment. While in prison, he wrote* Mein Kampf, *which preached a doctrine of racial-nationalist struggle for survival, advocated a German empire in Europe and the purging of the 'Jewish bacillus' from national life.*
>
> *One of the Nazis' greatest anxieties in 1932 was the financing of the election campaign. After Hitler's speech to the Industry Club at the Park Hotel in Düsseldorf, arranged by Fritz Thyssen, the anxiety was over. It was the first time `<?pagebreak number="118" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter008.html_p118}that many of the industrialists had met Hitler and his reception was cool and reserved but he spoke for two and a half hours without pause and made one of the best speeches of his life.*

In the year 1918, as I considered the position with cool and considered judgement, I was bound to confess: it is an appallingly difficult course to come before the people at such a time and to form for myself a new organization. It is naturally much easier to join one of the existing formations and thence to seek to overcome the inner division of the nation. But is that at all possible when one starts from the existing organizations? Has not every organization in the last resort the spirit, the men who can find satisfaction in its programme and in its struggle? If an organization has continually given way before Marxism and at length one day simply capitulated like a coward, has it not during sixty years been completely filled with a spirit and with men who neither understand the other way nor wish to pursue it? On the contrary, at a period of such confusion, will not the future lie with those who are prepared once more to pass through a sieve the body-politic, which has fallen into such disorder, so that from out of the people a new political leadership can crystallize, which knows how to take the mass of the nation in hand and can avoid the mistakes which led to downfall in the past?

I was naturally forced to say to myself that it would mean an appalling struggle, for I was not so fortunate as to possess an outstanding name; I was only a nameless German soldier, with a very small zinc identification number on my breast. But I came to realize that if a beginning was not made with the smallest cell, if a new body-politic was not thus formed within the nation, a body-politic which could overcome the existing 'ferments of decomposition', then the nation itself as a whole could never rise again. We have indeed in the past had a practical experience of that; it took 150 years before, from the fallen German Reich of ancient days, Prussia arose to fulfil its historic mission as the germ-cell of a new Reich. And believe me, the case is the same in the question of the internal regeneration of a people. Every idea must draw men to itself. Every idea must step out before the nation, must win from the nation the fighters whom it needs, and `<?pagebreak number="119" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter008.html_p119}must tread alone the difficult way with all its necessary consequences that it may one day gain the strength to turn the course of destiny.

Events have proved that this reasoning was right in the end. For though even today there are many in Germany who believe that we National Socialists would not be capable of constructive work -- they deceive themselves! If we were not, already today there would be no more bourgeoisie alive in Germany: the question Bolshevism or not Bolshevism would long ago have been decided ...

Today that Movement cannot be destroyed: it is there: people must reckon with it, whether they like it or not. (*Loud applause*.) And I am convinced that for all those who still believe in a future for Germany it is clear what their attitude must be. For here they see before them an organization inspired to the highest degree by national sentiment, constructed on the conception of an absolute authority in the leadership in all spheres, at every stage -- the solitary party which amongst its members has completely overcome not only the conception of internationalism but also the idea of democracy, which in its entire organization acknowledges only the principles of Responsibility, Command, and Obedience, and which besides all this for the first time has introduced into the political life of Germany a body numbering millions which is built up on the principle of achievement.

Here is an organization which is filled with an indomitable aggressive spirit, an organization which when a political opponent says 'your behaviour we regard as a provocation' for the first time does not see fit immediately to retire from the scene but brutally enforces its own will and hurls against the opponent the retort, 'We fight today! We fight tomorrow! And if you regard our meeting today as a provocation we shall hold yet another next week -- until you have learned that it is no provocation when *German* Germany also professes its belief!' And when you say 'You must not come into the street' we go into the street in spite of you. And when you say, 'Then we shall kill you', however many sacrifices you force upon us, this young Germany will always continue its marches, and one day it will completely reconquer for the Germans the German street.

And when people cast in our teeth our intolerance, we proudly acknowledge it -- yes, we have formed the inexorable decision to `<?pagebreak number="120" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter008.html_p120}destroy Marxism in Germany down to its very last root. And this decision we formed not from any love of brawling: I could easily imagine a life which in itself was fairer than to be hunted through Germany, to be persecuted by countless Government regulations, to stand constantly with one foot in gaol, and to have in the State no right which one can call one's own. I could imagine for myself a fairer destiny than that of fighting a battle which at least at the outset was regarded by all as an insane chimera. Finally I believe that I have the capacity to occupy some post or other in the Social Democratic Party: and one thing is certain: if I had turned my capacity to *this* service, I should today presumably be fit even to enter the Government. But for me it was a greater decision to choose a way on which I was guided by nothing save my own faith, my indestructible confidence in the natural forces -- still assuredly present -- of our people, and in its importance which with good leadership would one day necessarily reappear.

And now behind us there lie twelve years of fighting. That fight has not been waged in theory only and in the Party alone turned into practice: we are also ready to wage that fight on the larger scale. I cast my mind back to the time when with six other unknown men I founded this association, when I spoke before eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, twenty, thirty, and fifty persons; when I recall how after a year I had won sixty-four members for the Movement, how our small circle kept on growing, I must confess that that which has today been created, when a stream of millions of our German fellow-countrymen is flowing into our Movement, represents something which is unique in German history. The bourgeois parties have had seventy years to work in; where, I ask you, is the organization which could be compared with ours? Where is the organization which can boast, as ours can, that, at need, it can summon 400,000 men into the street, men who are schooled to blind obedience and are ready to execute any order -- provided that it does not violate the law? Where is the organization that in seventy years has achieved what we have achieved in barely twelve years? -- and achieved with means which were of so improvised a character that one can hardly avoid a feeling of shame when one confesses to an opponent how `<?pagebreak number="121" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter008.html_p121}poverty-stricken the birth and the growth of this great Movement were in the early days.

Today we stand at the turning-point of Germany's destiny. If the present development continues, Germany will one day of necessity land in Bolshevist chaos, but if this development is broken, then our people must be taken into a school of iron discipline and gradually freed from the prejudices of both camps. A hard schooling, but one we cannot escape!

If one thinks that one can preserve for all time the conceptions of 'bourgeois' and 'proletarian' then one will either preserve the weakness of Germany -- which means our downfall -- or one ushers in the victory of Bolshevism. If one refuses to surrender those conceptions, then in my judgement a resurrection of the German nation is no longer possible. The chalk line which *Weltanschauungen* have drawn for peoples in the history of the world already more than once has proved to be the death-line. Either we shall succeed in working out a body-politic hard as iron from this conglomerate of parties, associations, unions, and conceptions of the world, from this pride of rank and madness of class, or else, lacking this internal consolidation, Germany will fall in final ruin.

Even if another batch of twenty emergency decrees is rained down on our people, these will not stay the great line which leads to destruction, but if one day the road be rediscovered which leads upwards, then first of all the German people must be bent straight again. That is a process which none can escape! It is no good to say that the proletarians are alone responsible. No, believe me, our whole German people of all ranks has a full measure of responsibility for our collapse -- a measure pressed down and running over -- some because they willed it and have consciously sought to bring it about, the others because they looked on and were too weak to stop our downfall. In history the failure to act is weighed as strictly as is the purpose or the deed. Today no one can escape the obligation to complete the regeneration of the German body-politic: every one must show his personal sympathy, must take his place in the common effort.

If I speak to you today it is not to ask for your votes or to induce `<?pagebreak number="122" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter008.html_p122}you on my account to do this or that for the Party. No, I am here to expound a point of view, and I am convinced that the victory of this point of view would mean the only possible starting-point for a German recovery; it is indeed the last item standing to the credit of the German people. I hear it said so often by our opponents, 'You, too, will be unable to master the present crisis.' Supposing, gentlemen, that they are right, what would that mean? It would mean that we should be facing a ghastly period and that we should have to meet it with no other defences than a purely materialistic outlook on every side. And then the distress would, simply in its material aspect, be a thousandfold harder to bear, if one had failed to restore to the people any ideal whatsoever.

People say to me so often: 'You are only the drummer of national Germany.' And supposing that I were only the drummer? It would today be a far more statesmanlike achievement to drum once more into this German people a new faith than gradually to squander the only faith they have. Take the case of a fortress, imagine that it is reduced to extreme privations: as long as the garrison sees a possible salvation, believes in it, hopes for it, so long they can bear the reduced ration. But take from the hearts of men their last belief in the possibility of salvation, in a better future -- take that completely from them, and you will see how these men suddenly regard their reduced rations as the most important thing in life. The more you bring it home to their consciousness that they are only objects for men to bargain with, that they are only prisoners of world-politics, the more will they, like all prisoners, concentrate their thoughts on purely material interests.

On the other hand, the more you bring back a people into the sphere of faith, of ideals, the more will it cease to regard material distress as the one and only thing which counts. And the weightiest evidence for the truth of that statement is our own German people. We would not ever forget that the German people waged wars of religion for 150 years with prodigious devotion, that hundreds of thousands of men once left their plot of land, their property, and their belongings simply for an ideal, simply for a conviction. We would never forget that during those 150 years there was no trace of `<?pagebreak number="123" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter008.html_p123}even an ounce of material interests. Then you will understand how mighty is the force of an idea, of an ideal.

Only so can you comprehend how it is that in our Movement today hundreds of thousands of young men are prepared at the risk of their lives to withstand our opponents. I know quite well, gentlemen, that when National Socialists march through the streets and suddenly in the evening there arise a tumult and commotion, then the bourgeois draws back the window-curtain, looks out, and says: Once more my night's rest disturbed: no more sleep for me. Why must the Nazis always be so provocative and run about the place at night?

Gentlemen, if everyone thought like that, then no one's sleep at nights would be disturbed, it is true, but then the bourgeois today could not venture into the street. If everyone thought in that way, if these young folk had no ideal to move them and drive them forward, then certainly they would gladly be rid of these nocturnal fights. But remember that it means sacrifice when today many hundred thousands of SA and SS men of the National Socialist Movement every day have to mount on their lorries, protect meetings, undertake marches, sacrifice themselves night after night and then come back in the grey dawn either to workshop and factory or as unemployed to take the pittance of the dole: it means sacrifice when from the little which they possess they have further to buy their uniforms, their shirts, their badges, yes, and even pay their own fares. Believe me, there is already in all this the force of an ideal -- a great ideal!

And if the whole German nation today had the same faith in its vocation as these hundred thousands, if the whole nation possessed this idealism, Germany would stand in the eyes of the world otherwise than she stands now! For our situation in the world in its fatal effects is but the result of our own underestimate of German strength. Only when we have once more changed this fatal valuation of ourselves can Germany take advantage of the political possibilities which, if we look far enough into the future, can place German life once more upon a natural and secure basis -- and that means either new living-space and the development of a great internal market or protection of German economic life against the world without `<?pagebreak number="124" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter008.html_p124}the utilization of all the concentrated strength of Germany. The labour resources of our people, the capacities, we have them already: no one can deny that we are industrious. But we must first refashion the political preconditions: without that, industry and capacity, diligence and economy are in the last resort of no avail, for an oppressed nation will not be able to spend on its own welfare even the fruits of its own economy but must sacrifice them on the altar of exactions and tribute.

And so in contrast to our own official Government I cannot see any hope for the resurrection of Germany if we regard the foreign politics of Germany as the primary factor: the primary necessity is the restoration of a sound national German body-politic armed to strike. In order to realize this end I founded thirteen years ago the National Socialist Movement: that Movement I have led during the last twelve years, and I hope that one day it will accomplish this task and that, as the fairest result of its struggle, it will leave behind it a German body-politic completely renewed internally, intolerant of anyone who sins against the nation and its interests, intolerant against anyone who will not acknowledge its vital interests or who opposes them, intolerant and pitiless against anyone who shall attempt once more to destroy or disintegrate this body-politic, and yet ready for friendship and peace with anyone who has a wish for peace and friendship.

> *When Hitler sat down, the audience rose and cheered him wildly. Substantial contributions quickly flowed into the Nazi treasury from heavy industrial companies. Hitler had won an important victory, says his biographer Alan Bullock. German industrialists came to see in him the man who would defend their interests against the threat of Communism and the claims of the trade unions.*

[•]{.center}

[]{#chapter009.html}
