## `<?pagebreak number="125" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter009.html_p125}Stanley Baldwin London, 10 November 1932 {#chapter009.html_pen0000916 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The bomber will always get through' {#chapter009.html_pen0000920 .EB10SmallHead}

> *By 1932, the year that Hitler came to power, Baldwin had twice been prime minister and was now Lord President of the Council in Ramsay MacDonald's National Government. He had developed a horror of air warfare and bombing, especially after seeing the results of a study by the Committee of Imperial Defence, and believed that the League of Nations should ban the building of new military aircraft. The argument was pursued in Cabinet but inconclusively. Meanwhile President Hoover had also proposed that bombers should be abolished. Yet by the autumn Baldwin had decided that Britain could no longer proceed with unilateral disarmament.*
>
> *On 10 November (moved according to his most recent biographers by a 'truly daemonic force'), he delivered a short but sensational speech to the Commons arguing that disarmament by itself would not stop war but that it would reduce the dangers and opportunities of making war -- and ending with an appeal to the conscience of the young.*

What the world suffers from -- and I have said this before -- is a sense of fear, a want of confidence, and it is a fear held instinctively and without knowledge very often. But in my view, and I have slowly and deliberately come to this conclusion, there is no one thing more responsible for that fear -- I am speaking now of what the Hon. Gentleman the Member for Limehouse (Mr Attlee) called the common people of whom I am chief -- there is no greater cause of that fear than the fear of the air. Up to the time of the last war, civilians were exempt from the worst perils of war. They suffered sometimes from hunger, sometimes from the loss of sons and relatives serving in the Army, but now, in addition, they suffer from the fear, not only of being killed themselves, but, what is perhaps worse for a man, the fear of seeing his wife and children killed from the air.

These feelings exist among the ordinary people throughout the `<?pagebreak number="126" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter009.html_p126}whole civilized world, and I doubt if many of those who have that fear realize one or two things with reference to its cause. One is the appalling speed which the air has brought into modern warfare. The speed of air attack, compared with the attack of an army, is as the speed of a motor car to that of a four-in-hand and in the next war you will find that any town which is within reach of an aerodrome can be bombed within the first five minutes of war from the air, to an extent which was inconceivable in the last war, and the question will be, whose morale will be shattered quickest by that preliminary bombing? I think it is well also for the man in the street to realize that there is no power on earth that can protect him from being bombed. Whatever people may tell him, the bomber will always get through, and it is very easy to understand that, if you realize the area of space.

I said that any town within reach of an aerodrome could be bombed. Take any large town you like in this island or on the Continent within such reach. For the defence of that town and its suburbs, you have to split up the air into sectors for defence. Calculate that the bombing aeroplanes will be at least 20,000 feet high in the air, and perhaps higher, and it is a matter of simple mathematical calculation -- or I will omit the word 'simple' -- that you will have sectors of from ten to hundreds of cubic miles to defend.

Now imagine 100 cubic miles covered with cloud and fog, and you can calculate how many aeroplanes you would have to throw into that to have much chance of catching odd aeroplanes as they fly through it. It cannot be done, and there is no expert in Europe who will say that it can. The only defence is in offence, which means that you have to kill more women and children more quickly than the enemy if you want to save yourselves.

I will not pretend that we are not taking our precautions in this country. We have done it. We have made our investigations, much more quietly and hitherto without any publicity, but, considering the years that are required to make your preparations, any Government of this country in the present circumstances of the world would have been guilty of criminal negligence had they neglected to make their preparations. The same is true of other nations. What more `<?pagebreak number="127" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter009.html_p127}potent cause of fear can there be than this kind of thing that is going on on the Continent? And fear is a very dangerous thing. It is quite true that it may act as a deterrent in people's minds against war, but it is much more likely to act to make them want to increase armaments to protect them against the terrors that they know may be launched against them. We have to remember that aerial warfare is still in its infancy, and its potentialities are incalculable and inconceivable.

As far as the air is concerned, there is, as has been most truly said, no way of complete disarmament except the abolition of flying. Now that, again, is impossible. We have never known mankind go back on a new invention. It might be a good thing for this world, as I have heard some of the most distinguished men in the Air Service say, if man had never learned to fly. But he has learned to fly, and there is no more important question, not only before this House, but before every man, woman and child in Europe, than: 'What are we going to do with this power now we have got it?' I make no excuse for bringing this subject forward tonight to ventilate it in this first Assembly in the world, in the hope that perhaps what is said here may be read in other countries and may be considered and pondered, because on the solution of this question hangs not only, in my view, our civilization, but before that terrible day comes there hangs the lesser question, but a difficult one, of the possible rearmament of Germany with an air force. The two things are inextricably wrapped up together.

As long as the air exists, you cannot get rid of the fear of which I spoke, and which I believe to be the parent of many troubles. One cannot help reflecting that, after the hundreds of millions of years during which the human race has been on this earth, it is only within our generation that we have secured the mastery of the air. I certainly do not know how the youth of the world may feel, but it is not a cheerful thought to the older men that, having got that mastery of the air, we are going to defile the earth from the air as we have defiled the soil during all the years that mankind has been on it. This is a question for the younger men far more than it is for us. They are the men who fly in the air. Future generations will fly in the air more and more.

`<?pagebreak number="128" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter009.html_p128}Few of my colleagues around me here, probably, will see another great war. I do not think that we have seen the last great war, but I do not think there will be one just yet; at any rate, if it does come, we shall be too old to be of use to anyone. What about the younger men? How will they investigate this matter? It is they who will have to fight, and it is they who will have to fight out this bloody issue of war. It is really for them to decide. They are the majority upon the earth, and the matter touches them far more closely. The instrument is in their hands. There are some instruments so terrible that mankind has resolved not to use them. I myself happen to know of at least three inventions, deliberately proposed for use in the last war, that were never used -- potent to a degree and inhuman.

If the conscience of the young men should ever come to feel with regard to this one instrument that it is evil and should go, the thing will be done; but if they do not feel like that -- well, as I say, the future is in their hands. But when the next war comes, and European civilization is wiped out, as it will be and by no force more than by that force, then do not let them lay the blame upon the old men. Let them remember that they, they principally or they alone, are responsible for the terrors that have fallen upon the earth.

> *Members of parliament were shaken, even moved, by the speech, but its ambiguity left many anxious and perplexed. Where did the speech lead? Churchill asked. There was a sense of fatalism and helplessness about it. 'Tell the truth, tell the truth to the British people.' Although Baldwin had indeed told the truth, albeit in his gnomic manner, the speech did more harm than good because his striking phrase about the bomber always getting through was taken for defeatism and used to prove the futility of rearmament and disarmament alike*.

[•]{.center}

[]{#chapter010.html}
