## `<?pagebreak number="134" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p134}Adolf Hitler Berlin, 13 July 1934 {#chapter011.html_pen0000995 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The supreme justiciar of the German people' {#chapter011.html_pen0000999 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Hitler was made chancellor of Germany on 30 January 1933 and four weeks later the Reichstag Fire gave him the opportunity to establish a one-party system. A little over a year later on 30 June 1934, he eliminated his rivals on the Night of the Long Knives, when he used Nazi élite units (the SS) in the private army of Himmler, the Nazi police chief, to murder the older and more radical Nazi private army, the Brown-shirts (the SA), led by Ernst Röhm. There were more than one hundred victims of the killings, which made Hitler undisputed leader of the Nazi revolution.*
>
> *After the blood bath, Joseph Goebbels, Hitler's propagandist, forbade German newspapers to carry obituary notices of the victims, which only fed and intensified rumour, horror and fear. Hitler did not appear before the Reichstag until 13 July, when he spoke for two hours.*
>
> *Never had Hitler made so evident his contempt for the law or humanity and his determination to preserve his power at any cost.*

At one o'clock in the night I received the last dispatches telling me of the alarm summonses; at two o'clock in the morning I flew to Munich. Meanwhile Minister-President Göring had previously received from me the commission that if I proceeded to apply a purge he was to take similar measures at once in Berlin and in Prussia. With an iron fist he beat down the attack on the National Socialist state before it could develop. The necessity for acting with lightning speed meant that in this decisive hour I had very few men with me. In the presence of the Minister Goebbels and of the new Chief of Staff the action of which you are already informed was executed and brought to a close in Munich. Although only a few days before I had been prepared to exercise clemency, at this hour there was no place for any such consideration. Mutinies are suppressed in accordance with laws of iron that are eternally the same. If anyone reproaches me and asks why I `<?pagebreak number="135" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p135}did not resort to the regular courts of justice for conviction of the offenders, then all that I can say to him is this: in this hour I was responsible for the fate of the German people, and thereby I became the supreme justiciar of the German people!

Mutinous divisions have in all periods been recalled to order by decimation. Only one state has failed to make any use of its articles of war, and this state paid for that failure by collapse -- Germany. I did not wish to deliver up the young Reich to the fate of the old Reich. I gave the order to shoot those who were the ringleaders in this treason, and I further gave the order to burn out down to the raw flesh the ulcers of this poisoning of the wells in our domestic life and of the poisoning of the outside world. And I further ordered that if any of the mutineers should attempt to resist arrest, they were immediately to be struck down with armed force. The nation must know that its existence -- and that is guaranteed through its internal order and security -- can be threatened by no one with impunity! And everyone must know for all future time that if he raises his hand to strike the state, then certain death is his lot. And every National Socialist must know that no rank and no position can protect him from his personal responsibility and therefore from his punishment. I have prosecuted thousands of our former opponents on account of their corruption. I should in my own mind reproach myself if I were now to tolerate similar offences in our own ranks. No people and no government can help it if creatures arise such as we once knew in Germany, a Kutisker, for example, such as France came to know in a Stavisky, or such as we today have once more experienced -- men whose aim is to sin against a nation's interests. But every people is itself guilty if it does not find the strength to destroy such noxious creatures.

If people bring against me the objection that only a judicial procedure could precisely weigh the measure of the guilt and of its expiation, then against this view I lodge my most solemn protest. He who rises against Germany is a traitor to his country: and the traitor to his country is not to be punished according to the range and the extent of his act, but according to the purpose that that act has revealed. He who in his heart purposes to raise a mutiny and thereby breaks loyalty, breaks faith, breaks sacred pledges, he can expect `<?pagebreak number="136" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p136}nothing else than that he himself will be the first sacrifice. I have no intention to have the little culprits shot and to spare the great criminals. It is not my duty to inquire whether it was too hard a lot that was inflicted on these conspirators, these agitators and destroyers, these poisoners of the wellsprings of German public opinion and in a wider sense of world opinion: it is not mine to consider which of them suffered too severely: I have only to see to it that Germany's lot should not be intolerable ...

In these days, which have been days of severe trial both for me and for its members, the SA \[storm troopers\] has preserved the spirit of loyalty. Thus for the third time the SA has proved that it is mine, just as I will prove at any time that I belong to my SA men. In a few weeks' time the Brown Shirt will once more dominate the streets of Germany and will give to one and all clear evidence that because it has overcome its grievous distress the life of National Socialist Germany is only the more vigorous.

When in March of last year our young revolution stormed through Germany, my highest endeavour was to shed as little blood as possible. To millions of my former opponents, on behalf of the new state and in the name of the National Socialist party, I offered a general amnesty; millions of them have since joined us and are loyally cooperating in the rebuilding of the Reich.

I hoped that it might not be necessary any longer to be forced to defend this state yet again with arms in our hands. But since fate has now none the less put us to this test, all of us wish to pledge ourselves with only the greater fanaticism to hold fast to that which was formerly won at the price of the blood of so many of our best men and which today had to be maintained once more through the blood of German fellow countrymen. Just as one and a half years ago I offered reconciliation to our former opponents, so would I from henceforth also promise forgetfulness to all those who shared in the guilt of this act of madness. Let them bethink themselves, and remembering this melancholy calamity in our new German history let them devote themselves to the task of reparation. May they now recognize with surer insight than before the great task that fate sets us, which civil war and chaos cannot perform. May we all feel responsible `<?pagebreak number="137" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p137}for the most precious treasure that there can be for the German people: internal order, internal and external peace, just as I am ready to undertake responsibility at the bar of history for the twenty-four hours in which the bitterest decisions of my life were made, in which fate once again taught me in the midst of anxious care with every thought to hold fast to the dearest thing that has been given us in this world -- the German people and the German Reich!

> *After President von Hindenburg died on 2 August, an announcement was made within an hour that the office of president was being merged with that of the chancellor and that Hitler would become head of the state as well as Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces of the Reich. The same day the officers and men of the German army took their oath of allegiance not to the constitution or to the fatherland but to Hitler himself.*

[•]{.center}
