## Winston Churchill London, 12 November 1936 {#chapter011.html_pen0001075 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The locust years' {#chapter011.html_pen0001079 .EB10SmallHead}

> *By 1936 Winston Churchill, abandoned by his party, betrayed by his friends and stripped of office, was convinced that Germany was stronger in air power than Britain and France combined. He urged Stanley Baldwin to allow a House `<?pagebreak number="143" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p143}of Commons debate on defence, during which he delivered this speech, one of the greatest of his career. It was the day that Churchill spoke for all who knew that sooner or later Britain must confront Hitler and he worked on the speech through the night, dictating and revising passages to hone one of his finest philippics -- aimed directly at Baldwin.*
>
> *'He drives his points home with a sledgehammer,' Harold Nicolson recorded as he watched Churchill deliver the speech, which ended with a remarkable peroration in which he damned the House of Commons.*

The First Lord of the Admiralty in his speech the other night went even farther. He said, 'We are always reviewing the position.' Everything, he assured us, is entirely fluid. I am sure that that is true. Anyone can see what the position is. The Government simply cannot make up their minds, or they cannot get the Prime Minister to make up his mind. So they go on in strange paradox, decided only to be undecided, resolved to be irresolute, adamant for drift, solid for fluidity, all-powerful to be impotent. So we go on preparing more months and years -- precious, perhaps vital to the greatness of Britain -- for the locusts to eat. They will say to me, 'A Minister of Supply is not necessary, for all is going well.' I deny it. 'The position is satisfactory.' It is not true. 'All is proceeding according to plan.' We know what that means ...

Owing to past neglect, in the face of the plainest warnings, we have now entered upon a period of danger greater than has befallen Britain since the U-boat campaign was crushed; perhaps, indeed, it is a more grievous period than that, because at that time at least we were possessed of the means of securing ourselves and of defeating that campaign. Now we have no such assurance. The era of procrastination, of half-measures, of soothing and baffling expedients, of delays, is coming to its close. In its place we are entering a period of consequences. We have entered a period in which for more than a year, or a year and a half, the considerable preparations which are now on foot in Britain will not, as the Minister clearly showed, yield results which can be effective in actual fighting strength; while during this very period Germany may well reach the culminating point of her gigantic military preparations, and be forced by financial and economic stringency to contemplate a sharp decline, or perhaps `<?pagebreak number="144" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p144}some other exit from her difficulties. It is this lamentable conjunction of events which seems to present the danger of Europe in its most disquieting form. We cannot avoid this period; we are in it now. Surely, if we can abridge it by even a few months, if we can shorten this period when the German Army will begin to be so much larger than the French Army, and before the British Air Force has come to play its complementary part, we may be the architects who build the peace of the world on sure foundations.

Two things, I confess, have staggered me, after a long Parliamentary experience, in these Debates. The first has been the dangers that have so swiftly come upon us in a few years, and have been transforming our position and the whole outlook of the world. Secondly, I have been staggered by the failure of the House of Commons to react effectively against those dangers. That, I am bound to say, I never expected. I never would have believed that we should have been allowed to go on getting into this plight, month by month and year by year, and that even the Government's own confessions of error would have produced no concentration of Parliamentary opinion and force capable of lifting our efforts to the level of emergency. I say that unless the House resolves to find out the truth for itself it will have committed an act of abdication of duty without parallel in its long history.

[•]{.center}
