## Stanley Baldwin London, 12 November 1936 {#chapter011.html_pen0001089 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'I shall always trust the instincts of our democratic people' {#chapter011.html_pen0001093 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Baldwin reacted immediately to Churchill's jibe about the years that the locusts had eaten. He conceded that Britain had cut down the services during 1924--9 because it hoped for disarmament and believed there was no danger of a major war. Nor, he argued, was British public opinion ready for rearmament until 1934--5. Addressing much of his speech to the member for Epping, Churchill, and declaring that he would speak with the 'utmost frankness', he then set out his defence.*

`<?pagebreak number="145" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p145}Supposing I had gone to the country and said that Germany was rearming and that we must rearm, does anybody think that this pacific democracy would have rallied to that cry at that moment? I cannot think of anything that would have made the loss of the election from my point of view more certain. I think the country itself learned by certain events that took place during the winter of 1934--5 what the perils might be to it. All I did was to take a moment perhaps less unfortunate than another might have been, and we won the election with a large majority; but frankly I could conceive that we should at that time, by advocating certain courses, have been a great deal less successful. We got from the country -- with a large majority -- a mandate for doing a thing that no one, twelve months before, would have believed possible. It is my firm conviction that had the Government, with this great majority, used that majority to do anything that might be described as arming without a mandate -- and they did not do anything, except the slightly increased air programme for which they gave their reasons -- had I taken such action as my Right Hon. Friend desired me to take, it would have defeated entirely the end I had in view. I may be wrong, but I put that to the House as an explanation of my action in that respect.

I shall always trust the instincts of our democratic people. They may come a little late, but my word, they come with a certainty when they do come; they come with a unity not imposed from the top, not imposed by force, but a unity that nothing can break. I believe today that, whatever differences there may be among us in the country on various questions -- as there must be -- the conviction is biting deep into our country, with all its love of peace, that there must be no going back on our resolution for such rearmament as we deem necessary to meet any possible peril from whatever quarter it may come. That feeling is coupled with the feeling which we all have that we are as anxious as ever to see all the countries of Europe considering disarmament, especially in the air. But until that day comes, nothing will shake the resolution either of the Government or of this House or of our people.

It is very easy to be led into supposing that dictatorial methods are necessarily more effective than the coordination of free effort, but `<?pagebreak number="146" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p146}we must not imagine that other countries whose governments do not submit their plans for defence to Parliament and do not require the approval of the legislature for the power which they exercise, whose Ministers are never criticized and have not to explain themselves, therefore escape all trouble. The last war showed one thing plainly and it was that at times when we might have suspected that the enemy was prepared to the last button, that all was going happily with him and that he had no difficulties, he was, even then, struggling with handicaps and confusions of which we knew nothing. It is a mistake to suppose that our methods are necessarily inferior to other methods which are largely concealed from the public gaze. My Right Hon. Friend the Member for Epping seldom speaks nowadays without a quotation from the Latin tongue and I rejoice that it should be so. He gave us one today, and I, at this point, would like to give another: 'Omne ignotum pro terribili', which I might translate thus: 'Things you know nothing about are always bogies.'

Experience in the House of Commons has taught me the lesson that more is to be gained in this country by relying on willing cooperation than by adopting dictatorial methods, until they are forced upon you and become essential. The House of Commons and the British people are very alike. The exercise of compulsory powers inevitably involves, at any rate at first, a most serious dislocation of industry, a dislocation which may be out of all proportion to the benefits obtained. It may well be that, instead of being hastened, production for some time may be retarded. But it is certain -- and I must repeat this -- that it would so dislocate the ordinary free working of industry as to reduce our effective financial strength; and that financial strength, so carefully nursed and looked after through all these years, is one of the strongest weapons we have if war ever comes upon us.

The whole of our efforts in the field of diplomacy and foreign policy will be aimed at bringing agreement and peace to all foreign Powers. At the same time all our efforts will be devoted to this great question of defence -- the protection of our own people -- and we will not relax our efforts for one moment, because we know that while we shall work for the blessings of peace, there can be no peace, `<?pagebreak number="147" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p147}in Europe certainly, unless every country knows that we are prepared for war.

> *Baldwin's speech, a limp and lame reply, delivered haltingly, haunted his reputation to the grave and increased the sense of unease created by Churchill's speech -- but he was to win a triumph the following month when the abdication crisis erupted. He stood accused of acting complacently as Hitler built up German military power. Yet the archives for the era suggest that Baldwin was certainly more aware of the need to build up Britain's defences than his successor Neville Chamberlain.*

[•]{.center}
