## Chaim Weizmann Jerusalem, 25 November 1936 {#chapter011.html_pen0001106 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The Jews carry Palestine in their hearts' {#chapter011.html_pen0001110 .EB10SmallHead}

> *David Ben-Gurion, the great prime minister of Israel, described Chaim Weizmann (1874--1952) as the most gifted envoy the Jewish people ever produced. 'There was no other Jew in whom the non-Jewish world perceived the embodiment of the Jewish people, with their ability, their will, and their longings,' Ben-Gurion wrote. 'He was perhaps the only truly great ambassador produced by the Jewish people throughout the generations.'*
>
> *At no moment in his life was Weizmann a greater ambassador for the establishment of a state of Israel than when he addressed the royal commission under Lord Peel, set up by Stanley Baldwin in 1936 to consider the working of the mandate after a series of Arab attacks on Jews. Weizmann was convinced that the Peel Commission offered the hope that a new and possibly decisive phase in the Zionist movement might now be beginning.*
>
> *As he arrived to meet the commission, there were audible whispers from the spectators on either side of him: 'Ha-shem yatzliach darkecho' (God prosper you on your mission). 'I felt that I would be speaking for generations long since dead, for those who lay buried on Mount Scopus and those whose last resting places were scattered all over the world,' Weizmann wrote in his autobiography. 'I knew that any misstep of mine, any error, however involuntary, would be not mine alone `<?pagebreak number="148" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p148}but would redound to the discredit of my people. I was aware of a crushing sense of responsibility.'*
>
> *Speaking without a prepared text, he began his address in slow measured sentences and sought to put before the commission the permanent principles of the Zionist movement and the immediate urgency of the Jewish problem. He spoke for two and a half hours.*

I should like to put before you the Jewish problem as it presents itself today. It is a twofold problem; but its nature can perhaps be expressed in one word: it is the problem of the homelessness of a people. Speaking of homelessness, I should like to state that individual Jews, and individual groups of Jews, may have homes and sometimes very comfortable homes. Indeed, if one thinks of the small communities in the west of Europe beginning with England and continuing further down to the South -- France, Switzerland, Italy, Belgium, and Holland -- these Jewish communities are, as compared to the Jews in Central, Eastern and South-eastern Europe, in a fairly comfortable position. Then again, the position of the great Jewish community further west in America is, economically, and to a certain extent politically and morally, such that Jews there are free to work and labour without let or hindrance. But if one draws a line and takes the Rhine as the geographical boundary, almost everything to the east of the Rhine is today in a position, politically and economically, which may be described -- and I am not given, I think, to exaggeration -- as something that is neither life nor death; and one may add that if Europe today were in the same state as it was in 1914 before the War, with the highways and byways of Europe and the world in general open, then we should have witnessed an emigration of Jews that would probably have dwarfed the pre-war emigration -- and the pre-war emigration was not by any means small. I think that in the year 1914 alone there emigrated out of Russia, which then included Poland as well, something in the neighbourhood of 120,000 Jews.

They went in the majority of cases to America, where they could readily be absorbed in a highly developed industrial country. The emigrant found his livelihood almost immediately on arrival. This, as `<?pagebreak number="149" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p149}Your Lordship and the members of the Commission are well aware, cannot happen today. The world is closed; and we have recently heard it said in authoritative quarters in Geneva, in Poland, and in England, that there are one million Jews too many in Poland. This is not the place to enter into a discussion as to why exactly one million *Jews*? They are citizens of Poland; their fate and their destinies have been bound up with the fate and destinies of Poland for wellnigh a thousand years. They passed through all the vicissitudes of the Polish nation. They desire to make their contribution, good, bad or indifferent -- like everybody else -- to Polish development. Why should they be singled out as being a million too many?

What does it mean? Where can they go? Is there any place in the world which can rapidly absorb one million people, whoever they may be, Jews or non-Jews? The poor Polish peasant, perhaps ignorant and not very subtle, when he hears people in authority making a pronouncement like that, may possibly interpret it as meaning: here is a superfluous people standing in my way, which must be got rid of somehow.

I do not want to press the point any further. I shall not waste the time of the Commission by describing in any way what is happening in Germany. It is too well known to need elaboration. This accounts for the position of something like 3,600,000 Jews. Poland has slightly over three million; Germany had in 1932 or 1933 something like 600,000, but that number has since diminished. If one goes further afield, and takes the Jewries of Rumania, Latvia, Austria, one sees practically the same picture; and it is no exaggeration on my part to say that today almost six million Jews -- I am not speaking of the Jews in Persia and Morocco and such places, who are very inarticulate, and of whom one hears very little -- there are in this part of the world six million people pent up in places where they are not wanted, and for whom the world is divided into places where they cannot live, and places into which they may not enter.

Now we think this is not merely a problem which concerns the Jewish community. It is in our view a world problem of considerable importance. Naturally, it is one which affects primarily the Jewish community, and secondarily the state of affairs in that particular part `<?pagebreak number="150" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p150}of the world, a part of the world which since the War has moved towards new forms of political and social life, and which is not yet very strong or very mature either politically or economically. These six million people to whom I have referred are condemned to live from hand to mouth, they do not know today what is going to happen tomorrow. I am not speaking now of organized anti-Semitism; even assuming the host-nations were quite friendly, there would still be purely objective reasons in those parts of the world which would tend to grind down the Jewish community and make it into the flotsam and jetsam of the world -- grind it into economic dust, so to speak.

Since my early youth, My Lord, I have fought destructive tendencies in Jewry, but it is almost impossible to avoid destructive tendencies amongst a younger generation which lives in the state I have described, unless some hope is given to the young people that one day, some day in some distant future, one in five, one in ten, one in twenty, will find a refuge somewhere where he can work, where he can live, and where he can straighten himself up and look with open eyes at the world and at his fellow men and women. It is no wonder that a certificate for Palestine is considered the highest boon in this part of the world. One in twenty, one in thirty, may get it, and for them it is redemption; it is tantamount to freedom, the opportunity to live and work, and that is why they watch with such intensity all that is going on here, and whether or not the doors of Palestine will remain open or will remain closed.

I could go on dwelling on the tense position in Jewry today, aggravated, as it naturally has been, by the effects of the Great War. This is the moral side of the problem. In all countries we try to do our best, but somehow in many countries we are not entirely accepted as an integral part of the communities to which we belong. This feeling is one of the causes which have prompted Jews throughout the ages, and particularly in the last hundred years, to try to make a contribution towards the solution of the problem and to normalize -- to some extent to normalize -- the position of the Jews in the world. We are sufficiently strong, My Lord, to have preserved our identity, but an identity which is *sui generis* and not like the identity of other nations. `<?pagebreak number="151" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p151}When one speaks of the English or the French or the German nation, one refers to a definite State, a definite organization, a language, a literature, a history, a common destiny; but it is clear that when one speaks of the Jewish people, one speaks of a people which is a minority everywhere, a majority nowhere, which is to some extent identified with the races among which it lives, but still not quite identical. It is, if I may say so, a disembodied ghost of a race, without a body, and it therefore inspires suspicion, and suspicion breeds hatred. There should be one place in the world, in God's wide world, where we could live and express ourselves in accordance with our character, and make our contribution towards the civilized world, in our own way and through our own channels. Perhaps if we had, we would be better understood in ourselves, and our relation to other races and nations would become more normal. We would not have to be always on the defensive or, on the contrary, become too aggressive, as always happened with a minority forced to be constantly on the defensive.

What has produced this particular mentality of the Jews which makes me describe the Jewish race as a sort of disembodied ghost -- an entity and yet not an entity in accordance with the usual standards which are applied to define an entity? I believe the main cause which has produced the particular state of Jewry in the world is its attachment to Palestine. We are a stiff-necked people and a people of long memory. We never forget. Whether it is our misfortune or whether it is our good fortune, we have never forgotten Palestine, and this steadfastness, which has preserved the Jew throughout the ages and throughout a career that is almost one long chain of inhuman suffering, is primarily due to some physiological or psychological attachment to Palestine. We have never forgotten it nor given it up. We have survived our Babylonian and Roman conquerors. The Jews put up a fairly severe fight, and the Roman Empire, which digested half of the civilized world, did not digest small Judaea. Whenever they once got a chance, the slightest chance, there the Jews returned, there they created their literature, their villages, towns, and communities. If the Commission would take the trouble to study the post-Roman period of the Jews and the life of the Jews in Palestine, they would find that during the nineteen centuries which have passed since the destruction `<?pagebreak number="152" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p152}of Palestine as a Jewish political entity, there was not a single century in which the Jews did not attempt to come back.

It is, I believe, a fallacy to regard those 1,900 years as, so to say, a desert of time; they were not. When the material props of the Jewish commonwealth were destroyed, the Jews carried Palestine in their hearts and in their heads wherever they went. That idea continued to express itself in their ritual and in their prayers. In the East End of London the Jew still prays for dew in the summer and for rain in the winter, and his seasons and festivals are all Palestinian seasons and Palestinian festivals. When Rome destroyed their country, the intellectual leader of the Jewish community came to the Roman commander and said, 'You have destroyed all our material possessions; give us, I pray, some refuge for our houses of learning.' A refuge was found; the place still exists; it was then a big place, and is now a tiny railway station by the name of Yebna -- in Hebrew, *Yabneb*. There were schools there, and there the Jews continued their intellectual output, so that those schools became, so to speak, the spiritual homes, not only of Palestinian Jewry, but of Jewry at large, which was gradually filtering out of Palestine and dispersing all over the world. They replaced the material Palestine, the political Palestine, by a moral Palestine which was indestructible, which remained indestructible; and this yearning found its expression in a mass of literature, sacred and non-sacred, secular and religious.

The Balfour Declaration was issued by His Majesty's Government on 2 November 1917.

It has sometimes glibly been said, 'Here is a document, somewhat vague in its nature, issued in time of war. It was a wartime expedient.' I have a much higher opinion of British statesmen than to attribute to them an act of that kind. It was a solemn act, a promise given to a people, an ancient people, which finds itself in the position which I have described.

What did the Balfour Declaration mean? It meant something quite simple at that time, and I am saying so advisedly. It meant that Judaea was restored to the Jews or the Jews were restored to Judaea. I could submit to the Commission a series of utterances of responsible statesmen and men in every walk of life in England to show that this Declaration was at the time regarded as the Magna Carta of `<?pagebreak number="153" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter011.html_p153}the Jewish people; it was in a sense comparable with another Declaration made thousands of years before, when Cyrus allowed a remnant of the Jews to return from Babylon and to rebuild the Temple. To the ordinary man at that time reading the Declaration, what it meant is broadly indicated by the various speeches at a solemn meeting at the Opera House in London, where (among others) Lord Cecil spoke and said: 'Arabia for the Arabs, Judaea for the Jews, Armenia for the Armenians.' Much water and much blood have flowed under the various bridges of the world since that time, and not all of his predictions have been realized; but we read into the Declaration what the statesmen of Great Britain told us it meant. It meant a National Home, 'national' meaning that we should be able to live like a nation in Palestine, and 'Home' a place where we might live as free men in contradistinction to living on sufferance everywhere else. To English people I need not explain what the word 'home' means, or what it does *not* mean, to us everywhere else.

The meaning is clear, and the Jewry of the world, in the trenches of Europe, in the pogrom-swept area of Russia, saw it like that. Tens of thousands of Jews marched before the house of the British Consul at Odessa at the time. Behind them were half-organized bands of marauders and murderers sweeping the countryside and destroying everything in their wake. But those Jews poured out their hearts in gratitude to the one accessible representative of the British Government, whom they had never seen, of whom they had never heard, whose language they could not speak, whose mentality they could not understand. They felt that here something had been done for us which, after two thousand years of hope and yearning, would at last give us a resting-place in this terrible world.

> *The Peel Report recommended partition into separate Arab and Jewish states, a drastic solution that was rejected by the Arabs and most Zionists (but accepted by Weizmann). It was never implemented by the British government. The six million Jews for whom Weizmann spoke were exterminated by the Nazis, Israel was established as a Jewish state in Palestine in 1946 and Weizmann was elected president.*

[•]{.center}

[]{#chapter012.html}
