## `<?pagebreak number="156" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter013.html_p156}Stanley Baldwin London, 10 December 1936 {#chapter013.html_pen0001155 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The House today is a theatre which is being watched by the whole world' {#chapter013.html_pen0001159 .EB10SmallHead}

> *King Edward VIII signed his instrument of abdication on the morning of 10 December. Afterwards Baldwin went to see Queen Mary, the king's mother, and then lunched at 10 Downing Street with his wife. He wrote his speech for the Commons himself, sitting alone, on small scraps of paper. Then he left them behind and they had to be fetched for him. After all that he began by dropping them and spoke extempore from notes that appeared to be in alarming disarray.*
>
> *'To a quiet attentive House of Commons he made one of his greatest speeches, lasting just under an hour,' say his biographers Keith Middlemas and John Barnes, 'a triumph of art that concealed art, that gave the King the most favourable interpretation ... and which lifted the crisis at last from rumour and scandal on to the high dramatic plane where it has since largely remained.'*

The House must remember -- it is difficult to realize -- that His Majesty is not a boy, although he looks so young. We have all thought of him as our Prince, but he is a mature man, with wide and great experience of life and the world, and he always had before him three, nay, four, things, which in these conversations at all hours, he repeated again and again -- That if he went he would go with dignity. He would not allow a situation to arise in which he could not do that. He wanted to go with as little disturbance of his Ministers and his people as possible. He wished to go in circumstances that would make the succession of his brother as little difficult for his brother as possible; and I may say that any idea to him of what might be called a King's party, was abhorrent. He stayed down at Fort Belvedere because he said that he was not coming to London while these things were in dispute, because of the cheering crowds. I honour and respect him for the way in which he behaved at that time.

I have something here which, I think, will touch the House. It is a `<?pagebreak number="157" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter013.html_p157}pencilled note, sent to me by His Majesty this morning, and I have his authority for reading it. It is just scribbled in pencil:

> Duke of York. He and the King have always been on the best of terms as brothers and the King is confident that the Duke deserves and will receive the support of the whole Empire.

I would say a word or two on the King's position. The King cannot speak for himself. The King has told us that he cannot carry, and does not see his way to carry, these almost intolerable burdens of Kingship without a woman at his side, and we know that. This crisis, if I may use the word, has arisen now rather than later from that very frankness of His Majesty's character which is one of his many attractions. It would have been perfectly possible for His Majesty not to have told me of this at the date when he did, and not to have told me for some months to come. But he realized the damage that might be done in the interval by gossip, rumours and talk, and he made that declaration to me when he did, on purpose to avoid what he felt might be dangerous, not only here but throughout the Empire, to the moral force of the Crown which we are all determined to sustain.

He told me his intentions, and he has never wavered from them. I want the House to understand that. He felt it his duty to take into his anxious consideration all the representations that his advisers might give him and not until he had fully considered them did he make public his decision. There has been no kind of conflict in this matter. My efforts during these last days have been directed, as have the efforts of those most closely round him, in trying to help him to make the choice which he has not made; and we have failed. The King has made his decision to take this moment to send this Gracious Message because of his confident hope that by that he will preserve the unity of this country and of the whole Empire, and avoid those factious differences which might so easily have arisen.

It is impossible, unfortunately, to avoid talking to some extent today about oneself. These last days have been days of great strain, but it was a great comfort to me, and I hope it will be to the House, `<?pagebreak number="158" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter013.html_p158}when I was assured before I left him on Tuesday night, by that intimate circle that was with him at the Fort that evening, that I had left nothing undone that I could have done to move him from the decision at which he had arrived, and which he has communicated to us. While there is not a soul among us who will not regret this from the bottom of his heart, there is not a soul here today that wants to judge. We are not judges. He has announced his decision. He has told us what he wants us to do, and I think we must close our ranks, and do it ...

This House today is a theatre which is being watched by the whole world. Let us conduct ourselves with that dignity which His Majesty is showing in this hour of his trial. Whatever our regret at the contents of the Message, let us fulfil his wish, do what he asks, and do it with speed. Let no word be spoken today that the utterer of that word may regret in days to come, let no word be spoken that causes pain to any soul, and let us not forget today the revered and beloved figure of Queen Mary, what all this time has meant to her, and think of her when we have to speak, if speak we must, during this Debate. We have, after all, as the guardians of democracy in this little island to see that we do our work to maintain the integrity of that democracy and of the monarchy, which, as I said at the beginning of my speech, is now the sole link of our whole Empire and the guardian of our freedom. Let us look forward and remember our country and the trust reposed by our country in this, the House of Commons, and let us rally behind the new King -- (*Hon. Members: 'Hear, hear'* ) -- stand behind him, and help him; and let us hope that, whatever the country may have suffered by what we are passing through, it may soon be repaired and that we may take what steps we can in trying to make this country a better country for all the people in it.

> *Baldwin retired six months later and played no further part in public life -- but his speech on the abdication crowned his political career with adulation.*

[•]{.center}

[]{#chapter014.html}
