## `<?pagebreak number="161" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter015.html_p161}Leon Trotsky New York, 9 February 1937 {#chapter015.html_pen0001198 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'I stake my life' {#chapter015.html_pen0001202 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Ousted from power and then exiled by Stalin, Trotsky by 1937 had been living in Mexico for a year. The Moscow show trials initiated by Stalin after the assassination of Kirov, the party boss in Leningrad, had started in 1936 with Trotsky chosen to play the part of chief defendant* in absentia.
>
> *Stalin's aim was to link Trotsky and alleged Trotskyite conspirators such as Bukharin, Rykov, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Radek and Piatakov (all of them old Bolsheviks) to the different types of opposition, terror, counter-revolution, wrecking, espionage and treason in the Soviet Union and to destroy any potential opposition. The state prosecutor was Andrei Vyshinsky.*
>
> *More than six thousand people had gathered in the New York Hippodrome, on 9 February 1937, at a mass meeting called by the American Committee for the Defence of Leon Trotsky to hear him speak in his own cause. Arrangements had been made for the speech to be transmitted from Mexico direct to the hall. The meeting was to have been Trotsky's first opportunity of speaking directly to a large audience in defence of the accused in the Moscow trials.*
>
> *For reasons which are still unknown the speech could not be heard -- but it was a passionate, eloquent and prophetic denunciation of Stalin.*

Dear Listeners, Comrades, and Friends: Why does Moscow so fear the voice of a single man? Only because I know the truth, the whole truth. Only because I have nothing to hide. Only because I am ready to appear before a public and impartial commission of inquiry with documents, facts, and testimonies in my hands, and to disclose the truth to the very end. I declare: if this commission decides that I am guilty in the slightest degree of the crimes which Stalin imputes to me, I pledge in advance to place myself voluntarily in the hands of the executioners of the GPU. That, I hope, is clear. Have you all heard? I make this declaration before the entire world. I ask the Press to publish my words in the farthest corners of our planet. But if the `<?pagebreak number="162" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter015.html_p162}commission establishes -- do you hear me? -- that the Moscow trials are a conscious and premeditated frame-up, constructed with the bones and nerves of human beings, I will not ask my accusers to place themselves voluntarily before a firing-squad. No, the eternal disgrace in the memory of human generations will be sufficient for them! Do the accusers of the Kremlin hear me? I throw my defiance in their faces. And I await their reply!

At the heart of the Moscow trials is an absurdity. According to the official version, the Trotskyists had been organizing the most monstrous plot since 1931. However, all of them, as if by command, spoke and wrote in one way but acted in another. In spite of the hundreds of persons implicated in the plot, over a period of five years, not a trace of it was revealed: no splits, no denunciations, no confiscated letters, until the hour of the general confessions arrived! Then a new miracle came to pass. People who had organized assassinations, prepared war, divided the Soviet Union, these hardened criminals suddenly confessed in August 1936 not under the pressure of proofs -- no, because there were no proofs -- but for certain mysterious reasons, which hypocritical psychologists declare are peculiar attributes of the 'Russian soul'. Just think: yesterday they carried out railroad wrecking and poisoning of workers -- by unseen order of Trotsky. Today they are Trotsky's accusers and heap upon him their pseudo-crimes. Yesterday they dreamed only of killing Stalin. Today they all sing hymns of praise to him. What is it: a madhouse? No, they tell us, it is not a madhouse, but the 'Russian soul'. You lie, gentlemen, about the Russian soul. You lie about the human soul in general.

The miracle consists not only in the simultaneity and the universality of the confessions. The miracle, above all, is that, according to the general confessions, the conspirators did something which was fatal precisely to their own political interests, but extremely useful to the leading clique. Once more the conspirators before the tribunal said just what the most servile agents of Stalin would have said. Normal people, following the dictates of their own will, would never have been able to conduct themselves as Zinoviev, Kamenev, Radek, Piatakov, and the others did. Devotion to their ideas, political dignity, `<?pagebreak number="163" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter015.html_p163}the simple instinct of self-preservation would force them to struggle for themselves, for their personalities, for their interests, for their lives. The only reasonable and fitting question is this: Who led these people into a state in which all human reflexes are destroyed, and how did he do it? There is a very simple principle in jurisprudence, which holds the key to many secrets: *is fecit cui prodest*; he who benefits by it, he is the guilty one. The entire conduct of the accused has been dictated from beginning to end, not by their own ideas and interests, but by the interests of the ruling clique. And the pseudo-plot, and the confessions, the theatrical judgement and the entirely real executions, all were arranged by one and the same hand. Whose? *Cui prodest?* Who benefits? The hand of Stalin! The rest is deceit, falsehood, the idle babbling about the 'Russian soul'! In the trials there did not figure fighters, nor conspirators, but puppets in the hands of the GPU. They played assigned roles. The aim of the disgraceful performance: to eliminate the whole opposition, to poison the very source of critical thought, to definitely ensconce the totalitarian regime of Stalin.

We repeat: the accusation is a premeditated frame-up. This frame-up must inevitably appear in each of the defendants' confessions, if they are examined alongside the facts. The prosecutor Vyshinsky knows this very well. That is why he did not address a single concrete question to the accused, which would have embarrassed them considerably. The names, documents, dates, places, means of transportation, circumstances of the meetings -- around these decisive facts Vyshinsky has placed a cloak of shame, or to be more exact, a shameless cloak. Vyshinsky dealt with the accused, not in the language of the jurist, but in the conventional language of the past-master of frame-up, in the jargon of the thief. The insinuating character of Vyshinsky's questions -- along with the complete absence of material proofs -- this represents the second crushing evidence against Stalin.

Among you, dear listeners, there must be not a few people who freely say: 'The confessions of the accused are false, that is clear; but how was Stalin able to obtain such confessions; therein lies the secret!' In reality the secret is not so profound. The Inquisition, with a much more simple technique, extorted all sorts of confessions `<?pagebreak number="164" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter015.html_p164}from its victims. That is why the democratic penal law renounced the methods of the Middle Ages, because they led not to the establishment of the truth, but to a simple confirmation of the accusations dictated by the inquiring judge. The GPU trials have a thoroughly inquisitorial character: that is the simple secret of the confessions! ...

Let him who has a particle of imagination picture to himself an unfortunate Soviet citizen, an oppositionist, isolated and persecuted, a pariah, who is constrained to write, not telegrams of salutation to Stalin, but dozens and scores of confessions of his crimes. Perhaps in this world there are many heroes who are capable of bearing all kinds of tortures, physical or moral, which are inflicted on themselves, their wives, their children. I do not know ... My personal observations inform me that the capacities of the human nervous system are limited. Through the GPU Stalin can trap his victim in an abyss of black despair, humiliation, infamy, in such a manner that he takes upon himself the most monstrous crimes with the prospect of imminent death or a feeble ray of hope for the future as the sole outcome. If, indeed, he does not contemplate suicide.

Suicide or moral prostration: there is no other choice! But do not forget that in the prisons of the GPU even suicide is often an inaccessible luxury!

The Moscow trials do not dishonour the revolution, because they are the progeny of reaction. The Moscow trials do not dishonour the old generation of Bolsheviks; they only demonstrate that even Bolsheviks are made of flesh and blood, and that they do not resist endlessly when over their heads swings the pendulum of death. The Moscow trials dishonour the political regime which has conceived them: the regime of Bonapartism, without honour and without conscience! All of the executed died with curses on their lips for this regime.

The Moscow trials are a signal. Woe to them who do not heed! The Reichstag trial surely had a great importance. But it concerned only vile Fascism, this embodiment of all the vices of darkness and barbarism. The Moscow trials are perpetrated under the banner of socialism. We will not concede this banner to the masters of falsehood! `<?pagebreak number="165" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter015.html_p165}If our generation happens to be too weak to establish socialism over the earth, we will hand the spotless banner down to our children. The struggle which is in the offing transcends by far the importance of individuals, factions, and parties. It is a struggle for the future of all mankind. It will be severe. It will be lengthy. Whoever seeks physical comfort and spiritual calm, let him step aside. In time of reaction it is more convenient to lean on the bureaucracy than on the truth. But all those for whom the word socialism is not a hollow sound but the content of their moral life -- forward! Neither threats nor persecutions nor violations can stop us! Be it even over our bleaching bones, the truth will triumph! We will blaze the trail for it. It will conquer! Under all the severe blows of fate, I shall be happy, as in the best days of my youth, if together with you I can contribute to its victory! Because, my friends, the highest human happiness is not the exploitation of the present but the cooperation of the future.

> *The show trials went on, culminating in the trial of Bukharin and Rykov in 1938. On a single day in December 1938 Stalin sanctioned the execution of 3,167 prisoners. On 20 August 1940, Trotsky was battered to death in his Mexican home by one of Stalin's agents.*

[•]{.center}
