## `<?pagebreak number="182" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter016.html_p182}Leo Amery London, 7 May 1940 {#chapter016.html_pen0001368 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'In the name of God, go' {#chapter016.html_pen0001372 .EB10SmallHead}

> *By 1940, Leo Amery (1873--1955) was almost at the end of his political career, during which he had been First Lord of the Admiralty, Colonial Secretary and Dominions Secretary in the 1920s. Now a distinguished elder statesman, he was a fierce critic of Chamberlain's vacillation and weak leadership. On the day before war was declared, it was Amery who had shouted to Arthur Greenwood, the former Labour leader, to 'Speak for England' when he rose to speak after Chamberlain*.
>
> *On* 7 *May 1940, Chamberlain opened a debate on the disastrous Norwegian campaign. Among the younger Conservative* MPs*, there were many territorial officers who spoke for the units which had suffered in Norway. Among them, wearing the uniform of Admiral of the Fleet, was Sir Roger Keyes, who denounced the government*.
>
> *Then Amery, a friend and colleague of Chamberlain's for many years and a fellow Birmingham* MP*, stood up to speak. He was called during the dinner hour but the House quickly filled up as he moved the target of Chamberlain's critics from the navy towards the prime minister and his conduct of the war. Sensing the mood of the Commons, and with devastating effect, he ended his speech with the angry words used by Oliver Cromwell to the Long Parliament in the seventeenth century. As he uttered them, he pointed at the prime minister and delivered his pitiless attack. It was one of the most dramatic moments in the tumultuous two-day debate*.

Believe me, as long as the present methods prevail, all our valour and all our resources are not going to see us through. Above all, so long as they prevail, time is not going to be on our side, because they are methods which, inevitably and inherently, waste time and weaken decisions. What we must have, and have soon, is a supreme war directorate of a handful of men free from administrative routine, free to frame policy among themselves, and with the task of supervising, inspiring, and impelling a group of departments clearly allocated to each one of them. That is the only way. We learned that in the last `<?pagebreak number="183" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter016.html_p183}war. My Right Hon. Friend the Member for Caernarfon Boroughs (Mr Lloyd George) earned the undying gratitude of the nation for the courage he showed in adopting what was then a new experiment. The experiment worked, and it helped to win the war. After the war years, the Committee of Imperial Defence laid it down as axiomatic that, while in a minor war you might go on with an ordinary Cabinet, helped perhaps by a War Committee, in a major war you must have a War Cabinet -- meaning precisely the type of Cabinet that my Right Hon. Friend introduced then. The overwhelming opinion of this House and of the public outside has been demanding that for a long while. We are told that there would be no particular advantage in it at the present time. I ask, Is this or is this not a major war?

We must have, first of all, a right organization of government. What is no less important today is that the Government shall be able to draw upon the whole abilities of the nation. It must represent all the elements of real political power in this country, whether in this House or not. The time has come when Hon. and Right Hon. Members opposite must definitely take their share of the responsibility. The time has come when the organization, the power and influence of the Trades Union Congress cannot be left outside. It must, through one of its recognized leaders, reinforce the strength of the national effort from inside. The time has come, in other words, for a real National Government ...

Just as our peacetime system is unsuitable for war conditions, so does it tend to breed peacetime statesmen who are not too well fitted for the conduct of war. Facility in debate, ability to state a case, caution in advancing an unpopular view, compromise and procrastination are the natural qualities -- I might almost say, virtues -- of a political leader in time of peace. They are fatal qualities in war. Vision, daring, swiftness and consistency of decision are the very essence of victory. In our normal politics, it is true, the conflict of party did encourage a certain combative spirit. In the last war we Tories found that the most perniciously aggressive of our opponents, the Right Hon. Member for Caernarfon Boroughs, was not only aggressive in words, but was a man of action. In recent years the normal weakness of our political life has been accentuated by a coalition based upon no clear `<?pagebreak number="184" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter016.html_p184}political principles. It was in fact begotten of a false alarm as to the disastrous results of going off the Gold Standard. It is a coalition which has been living ever since in a twilight atmosphere between Protection and Free Trade and between unprepared collective security and unprepared isolation. Surely, for the Government of the last ten years to have bred a band of warrior statesmen would have been little short of a miracle. We have waited for eight months, and the miracle has not come to pass. Can we afford to wait any longer?

Somehow or other we must get into the Government men who can match our enemies in fighting spirit, in daring, in resolution and in thirst for victory. Some three hundred years ago, when this House found that its troops were being beaten again and again by the dash and daring of the Cavaliers, by Prince Rupert's Cavalry, Oliver Cromwell spoke to John Hampden. In one of his speeches he recounted what he said. It was this:

> 'I said to him, "Your troops are most of them old, decayed serving men and tapsters and such kind of fellows ... You must get men of a spirit that are likely to go as far as they will go, or you will be beaten still." '

It may not be easy to find these men. They can be found only by trial and by ruthlessly discarding all who fail and have their failings discovered. We are fighting today for our life, for our liberty, for our all; we cannot go on being led as we are. I have quoted certain words of Oliver Cromwell. I will quote certain other words. I do it with great reluctance, because I am speaking of those who are old friends and associates of mine, but they are words which, I think, are applicable to the present situation. This is what Cromwell said to the Long Parliament when he thought it was no longer fit to conduct the affairs of the nation:

> 'You have sat too long here for any good you have been doing. Depart, I say, and let us have done with you. In the name of God, go.'

[•]{.center}

[]{#chapter017.html}
