## `<?pagebreak number="185" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter017.html_p185}David Lloyd George London, 7 May 1940 {#chapter017.html_pen0001389 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'Sacrifice the seals of office' {#chapter017.html_pen0001393 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Leo Amery had pointed his finger at Neville Chamberlain and used Cromwell's words: 'In the name of God, go.' Then, as one of the most memorable debates in British history went into its second day, the Labour Party decided to call for a vote of censure*.
>
> *Chamberlain was startled, angry, and taken unawares. He jumped up and declared: 'I do not seek to evade criticism but I say to my friends in the House, and I have friends in the House, no government can prosecute a war efficiently unless it has public and parliamentary support. I accept this challenge. I welcome it indeed. At least I shall see who is with us and who is against us and I call on my friends to support us in the lobby tonight*.'
>
> *Chamberlain's intervention was a major miscalculation and provoked an unforgettable speech -- the last decisive intervention in the House of Commons by Lloyd George. Aroused by Chamberlain's appeal to his 'friends' and the prime minister's cheapening of the office he had held with such distinction during the last world war, he now had his revenge for years of exclusion from power*.

The situation is a grave one -- I agree with what was said about that by the Prime Minister -- and it would be a fatal error on our part not to acknowledge it. In such experience as I have had of war direction I have never tried to minimize the extent of a disaster. I try to get the facts, because unless you really face the facts you cannot overcome the difficulties and restore the position. There is no case, in my judgement, for panic. I say that deliberately, after a good deal of reflection, but there is a grave case for pulling ourselves together. We cannot do that unless we tell the country the facts. They must realize the magnitude of our jeopardy. We have two immense Empires federated in the struggle for liberty, the two greatest Empires in the world, the British Empire and the French Empire, with almost inexhaustible resources but not easily mobilized, not easily roused, especially ours.

`<?pagebreak number="186" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter017.html_p186}You are not going to rouse the British Empire -- because you will have to do it not merely in Britain but throughout the world -- to put forth the whole of its strength unless and until you tell it the facts and realities of the peril that confronts it. At the cost of unpleasantness, I am going to do that, not with a view to terrifying them or spreading dismay and consternation, but with a view to rousing real action and not sham action such as we have had. It is no use saying that the balance of advantage is in our favour, or adding up the numbers of ships sunk on either side. That kind of petty-cash balance-sheet is not the thing to look at. There are more serious realities than that.

We promised Poland; we promised Czecho-Slovakia. We said: 'We will defend your frontiers if you will revise them.' There was a promise to Poland, to Norway, and to Finland. Our promissory notes are now rubbish on the market. (*Hon. Members: 'Shame*.*'*) Tell me one country at the present moment, one neutral country, that would be prepared to stand up and finance us on a mere promise from us? What is the use of not facing facts? ...

The Hon. Member for Stockton-on-Tees (Mr Harold Macmillan) gave the whole of the facts, and they have never been answered yet. That is the situation with regard to our strategical position. What is the use of denying it? It is one of the facts that we have to face. We have to restore that prestige in the world if we are to win this war. There is also the fact that the state of our preparations is known to the world. We started these preparations five years ago, in 1935. In 1935 a promise of rearmament was made; in 1936 active proposals were submitted to this House and were passed without a Division. The Government said they would commit us to £1,500 million. If they had asked for more and had said that it was necessary, there was no party in this House which would have challenged it. (*Interruption*.) If any party had challenged it, you had your majority. What has been done? Is there anyone in this House who will say that he is satisfied with the speed and efficiency of the preparations in any respect for air, for Army, yea, for Navy? Everybody is disappointed. Everybody knows that whatever was done was done half-heartedly, ineffectively, without drive and unintelligently. For three or four years I thought to myself that the facts with regard to `<?pagebreak number="187" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter017.html_p187}Germany were exaggerated by the First Lord, because the then Prime Minister -- not this Prime Minister -- said that they were not true. The First Lord was right about it. Then came the war. The tempo was hardly speeded up. There was the same leisureliness and inefficiency. Will anybody tell me that he is satisfied with what we have done about aeroplanes, tanks, guns, especially anti-aircraft guns? Is anyone here satisfied with the steps we took to train an Army to use them? Nobody is satisfied. The whole world knows that. And here we are in the worst strategic position in which this country has ever been placed.

*Sir Patrick Hannon (Birmingham, Moseley):* We have our sea power.

*Mr J. J. Davidson (Glasgow, Maryhill):* And your dividends.

*Mr Lloyd George:* I wish we had used it in some parts of Norway. I do not think that the First Lord was entirely responsible for all the things that happened there.

*Mr Churchill:* I take complete responsibility for everything that has been done by the Admiralty, and I take my full share of the burden.

*Mr Lloyd George:* The Right Hon. Gentleman must not allow himself to be converted into an air-raid shelter to keep the splinters from hitting his colleagues. But that is the position, and we must face it. I agree with the Prime Minister that we must face it as a people and not as a party, nor as a personal issue. The Prime Minister is not in a position to make his personality in this respect inseparable from the interests of the country.

*The Prime Minister:* What is the meaning of that observation? I have never represented that my personality -- (*Hon. Members: 'You did!'*) On the contrary, I took pains to say that personalities ought to have no place in these matters.

*Mr Lloyd George:* I was not here when the Right Hon. Gentleman made the observation, but he definitely appealed on a question which is a great national, Imperial and world issue. He said, 'I have got my friends.' It is not a question of who are the Prime Minister's friends. It is a far bigger issue. The Prime Minister must remember that he has met this formidable foe of ours in peace and in war. He has always been worsted. He is not in a position to appeal on the grounds of friendship. He has appealed for sacrifice. The nation is prepared for every sacrifice so long as it has leadership, so long as the `<?pagebreak number="188" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter017.html_p188}Government show clearly what they are aiming at and so long as the nation is confident that those who are leading it are doing their best. I say solemnly that the Prime Minister should give an example of sacrifice, because there is nothing which can contribute more to victory in this war than that he should sacrifice the seals of office.

> *When the Commons voted, the government's majority was reduced to 81 from its usual figure of 200. Forty-one Tories voted with the opposition and some sixty abstained. As Chamberlain left the House, a few Tory rebels, among them Harold Macmillan (who was later to be prime minister) sang 'Rule Britannia!' and shouted 'Go, Go, Go!' Winston Churchill became prime minister of a coalition government on 10 May.*

[•]{.center}
