## `<?pagebreak number="195" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter018.html_p195}J. B. Priestley London, 1940 {#chapter018.html_pen0001491 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'This little steamer' {#chapter018.html_pen0001495 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Churchill did not speak alone after Dunkirk. J. B. Priestley, the British novelist, commanded almost as big an audience for his Postscript broadcasts on BBC Radio with their cheerful, chatty understatements.*
>
> *Priestley, the author of* Good Companions *and* English Journey*,* *captured not only the mood of defiance of the British but also their deeply held inner conviction that they would triumph over 'little old Hitler' as well as the quintessential English spirit (echoing Stanley Baldwin's speech on England, [page 94](#chapter005.html_p94)) that eventually conquered Hitler -- as these two short Postscripts demonstrate.*

Here at Dunkirk is another English epic. And to my mind what was most characteristically English about it -- so typical of us, so absurd and yet so grand and gallant that you hardly know whether to laugh or to cry when you read about them -- was the part played in the difficult and dangerous embarkation -- not by the warships, magnificent though they were -- but by the little pleasure-steamers. We've known them and laughed at them, these fussy little steamers, all our lives. We have called them 'the shilling sicks'. We have watched them load and unload their crowds of holiday passengers -- the gents full of high spirits and bottled beer, the ladies eating pork pies, the children sticky with peppermint rock. Sometimes they only went as far as the next seaside resort. But the boldest of them might manage a Channel crossing, to let everybody have a glimpse of Boulogne. They were usually paddle steamers, making a great deal more fuss with all their churning than they made speed; and they weren't proud, for they let you see their works going round. They liked to call themselves *Queens* and *Belles*; and even if they were new, there was always something old-fashioned, a Dickens touch, a mid-Victorian air, about them. They seemed to belong to the same ridiculous holiday world as pierrots and piers, sand castles, ham-and-egg teas, palmists, automatic machines, and crowded sweating promenades. But `<?pagebreak number="196" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter018.html_p196}they were called out of that world -- and, let it be noted -- they were called out in good time and good order. Yes, those 'Brighton Belles' and 'Brighton Queens' left that innocent foolish world of theirs -- to sail into the inferno, to defy bombs, shells, magnetic mines, torpedoes, machine-gun fire -- to rescue our soldiers. Some of them -- alas -- will never return. Among those paddle steamers that will never return was one that I knew well, for it was the pride of our ferry service to the Isle of Wight -- none other than the good ship *Gracie Fields*. I tell you, we were proud of the *Gracie Fields*, for she was the glittering queen of our local line, and instead of taking an hour over her voyage, used to do it, churning like mad, in forty-five minutes. And now never again will we board her at Cowes and go down into her dining saloon for a fine breakfast of bacon and eggs. She has paddled and churned away -- for ever. But now -- look -- this little steamer, like all her brave and battered sisters, is immortal. She'll go sailing proudly down the years in the epic of Dunkirk. And our great-grandchildren, when they learn how we began this War by snatching glory out of defeat, and then swept on to victory, may also learn how the little holiday steamers made an excursion to hell and came back glorious.

I think the countryman knows, without being told, that we hold our lives here, as we hold our farms, upon certain terms. One of those terms is that while wars still continue, while one nation is ready to hurl its armed men at another, you must if necessary stand up and fight for your own. And this decision comes from the natural piety of simple but sane men. Such men, you will notice, are happier now than the men who have lost that natural piety.

Well, as we talked on our post on the hilltop, we watched the dusk deepen in the valleys below, where our women-folk listened to the news as they knitted by the hearth, and we remembered that these were our homes and that now at any time they might be blazing ruins, and that half-crazy German youths, in whose empty eyes the idea of honour and glory seems to include every form of beastliness, might soon be let loose down there. The sentries took their posts. There was a mist coming over the down. Nothing much happened for a time. A green light that seemed to defy all black-out regulations turned out to `<?pagebreak number="197" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter018.html_p197}be merely an extra large and luminous glow-worm; the glow-worms, poor ignorant little creatures, don't know there's a war on and so continue lighting themselves up. A few searchlights went stabbing through the dusk and then faded. The mist thickened, and below in all the valleys, there wasn't the faintest glimmer of light. You heard the ceaseless high melancholy singing of the telegraph wires in the wind.

So we talked about what happened to us in the last war, and about the hay and the barley, about beef and milk and cheese and tobacco. Then a belt of fog over to the left became almost silvery, because somewhere along there all the searchlights were sweeping the sky. Then somewhere behind that vague silveriness, there was a sound as if gigantic doors were being slammed to. There was the rapid stabbing noise of anti-aircraft batteries, and far away some rapping of machine-guns. Then the sirens went, in our two nearest towns, as if all that part of the darkened countryside, like a vast trapped animal, were screaming at us.

> *J. B. Priestley was included among the 2,820 people who were to be rounded up by the Nazis as dangerous adversaries after they had conquered Britain. They also included Noël Coward, Virginia Woolf, Aldous Huxley, E. M. Forster, H. G. Wells and Bertrand Russell.*

[•]{.center}
