## Éamon De Valera Dublin, 17 March 1943 {#chapter021.html_pen0001760 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The vision of such an Ireland' {#chapter021.html_pen0001764 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Guerrilla commander, political prisoner, successful revolutionary, a partisan in civil war, Éamon de Valera (1882--1975) was prime minister of Ireland for more than twenty years and president for fourteen years until he retired in 1973 at the age of ninety. He was elected president of Sinn Féin, the Irish republican `<?pagebreak number="220" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter021.html_p220}party, in 1917, but subsequently founded Fianna Fáil and formed a government in 1932. As prime minister he gradually cut the links binding Dublin to British rule. A new constitution in 1937 created the sovereign democratic state of Eire*.
>
> *As Roy Foster, the historian of Ireland, says, Fianna Fáil Ireland was a nation set apart by Catholicism and nationality: the interlocking relationships of Church and politics helped to define a unique, God-given way of life. There was also revealed a fierce suspicion of cosmopolitanism and what it stood for, as shown in de Valera's St Patrick's Day broadcasts on the new national radio station*.
>
> *The most celebrated of those broadcasts was made in 1943 when he called up a vision of an Ireland characterized by cosy homesteads, athletic youths and comely maidens*.

Before the present war began I was accustomed on St Patrick's Day to speak to our kinsfolk in foreign lands, particularly those in the United States, and to tell them year by year of the progress being made towards building up the Ireland of their dreams and ours -- the Ireland that we believe is destined to play, by its example and its inspiration, a great part as a nation among the nations.

Acutely conscious though we all are of the misery and desolation in which the greater part of the world is plunged, let us turn aside for a moment to that ideal Ireland that we would have. That Ireland which we dreamed of would be the home of a people who valued material wealth only as the basis of right living, of a people who were satisfied with frugal comfort and devoted their leisure to the things of the spirit -- a land whose countryside would be bright with cosy homesteads, whose fields and villages would be joyous with the sounds of industry, with the romping of sturdy children, the contests of athletic youths and the laughter of comely maidens, whose firesides would be forums for the wisdom of serene old age. It would, in a word, be the home of a people living the life that God desires that man should live.

With the tidings that make such an Ireland possible, St Patrick came to our ancestors 1,500 years ago, promising happiness here as well as happiness hereafter. It was the pursuit of such an Ireland that later made our country worthy to be called the Island of Saints and `<?pagebreak number="221" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter021.html_p221}Scholars. It was the idea of such an Ireland, happy, vigorous, spiritual, that fired the imagination of our poets, that made successive generations of patriotic men give their lives to win religious and political liberty, and that will urge men in our own and future generations to die, if need be, so that these liberties may be preserved.

One hundred years ago the Young Irelanders, by holding up the vision of such an Ireland before the people, inspired our nation and moved it spiritually as it had hardly been moved since the golden age of Irish civilization. Fifty years after the Young Irelanders, the founders of the Gaelic League similarly inspired and moved the people of their day, as did later the leaders of the Volunteers. We of this time, if we have the will and the active enthusiasm, have the opportunity to inspire and move our generation in like manner. We can do so by keeping this thought of a noble future for our country constantly before our minds, ever seeking in action to bring that future into being, and ever remembering that it is to our nation as a whole that future must apply.

For many the pursuit of the material is a necessity. Man, to express himself fully and to make the best use of the talents God has given him, needs a certain minimum of comfort and leisure. A section of our people have not yet this minimum. They rightly strive to secure it, and it must be our aim and the aim of all who are just and wise to assist in the effort. But many have got more than is required and are free, if they choose, to devote themselves more completely to cultivating the things of the mind, and in particular those which mark us out as a distinct nation.

The first of these latter is the national language. It is for us what no other language can be. It is our very own. It is more than a symbol; it is an essential part of our nationhood. It has been moulded by the thought of a hundred generations of our forebears. In it is stored the accumulated experience of a people, our people, who even before Christianity was brought to them were already cultured and living in a well-ordered society. The Irish language spoken in Ireland today is the direct descendant without break of the language our ancestors spoke in those far-off days.

As a vehicle of three thousand years of our history, the language `<?pagebreak number="222" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter021.html_p222}is for us precious beyond measure. As the bearer to us of a philosophy, of an outlook on life deeply Christian and rich in practical wisdom, the language today is worth far too much to dream of letting it go. To part with it would be to abandon a great part of ourselves, to lose the key of our past, to cut away the roots from the tree. With the language gone we could never aspire again to being more than half a nation.

For my part, I believe that this outstanding mark of our nationhood can be preserved and made forever safe by this generation. I am indeed certain of it, but I know that it cannot be saved without understanding and cooperation and effort and sacrifice. It would be wrong to minimize the difficulties. They are not slight. The task of restoring the language as the everyday speech of our people is a task as great as any nation ever undertook. But it is a noble task. Other nations have succeeded in it, though in their case, when the effort was begun, their national language was probably more widely spoken among their people than is ours with us. As long as the language lives, however, on the lips of the people as their natural speech in any substantial part of this land we are assured of success if -- *if* we are in earnest.

[•]{.center}
