## Aneurin Bevan London, 23 April 1951 {#chapter023.html_pen0001996 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'There is only one hope for mankind' {#chapter023.html_pen0002000 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Aneurin Bevan (1897--1960) was the son of a miner who left school at thirteen to work on the coal-face and rose to become the spokesman for the South Wales miners during the General Strike of 1926. He became an MP in 1929, was the most constructive of Churchill's critics during the Second World War and was one of the greatest Labour orators.*
>
> *As minister of health from 1945 to 1951, he was the founder of the British National Health Service -- but he resigned from the government on 21 April 1951 in protest at the imposition of health-service charges to meet defence costs. He told Clement Attlee, the prime minister, that he could not carry out policies which were 'repugnant' to his conscience.*
>
> *Two days later he made his resignation speech to the Commons. He stood almost alone. There was no sympathy on the Conservative benches and Labour MPs feared he would destroy the government.*

The western world has embarked upon a campaign of arms production upon a scale, so quickly, and of such an extent that the foundations of political liberty and Parliamentary democracy will not be able to sustain the shock. This is a very grave matter indeed. I have always said that the defence programme must always be consistent with the maintenance of the standard of life of the British people and the maintenance of the social services, and that as soon as it became clear we had engaged upon an arms programme inconsistent with those considerations, I could no longer remain a Member of the Government.

I therefore beg the House and the country, and the world, to think `<?pagebreak number="250" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter023.html_p250}before it is too late. It may be that on such an occasion as this the dramatic nature of a resignation might cause even some of our American friends to think before it is too late. It has always been clear that the weapons of the totalitarian States are, first, social and economic, and only next military; and if in attempting to meet the military effect of those totalitarian machines, the economies of the western world are disrupted and the standard of living is lowered or industrial disturbances are created, then Soviet Communism establishes a whole series of Trojan horses in every nation of the western economy ...

This great nation has a message for the world which is distinct from that of America or that of the Soviet Union. Ever since 1945 we have been engaged in this country in the most remarkable piece of social reconstruction the world has ever seen. By the end of 1950 we had assumed the moral leadership of the world. (*Interruption.*) It is no use Hon. Members opposite sneering, because when they come to the end of the road it will not be a sneer which will be upon their faces. There is only one hope for mankind, and that hope still remains in this little island. It is from here that we tell the world where to go and how to go there, but we must not follow behind the anarchy of American competitive capitalism which is unable to restrain itself at all, as is seen in the stockpiling that is now going on, and which denies to the economy of Great Britain even the means of carrying on our civil production ...

The Chancellor of the Exchequer in this year's Budget proposes to reduce the Health expenditure by £13 million -- only £13 million out of £4,000 million.

If he finds it necessary to mutilate, or begin to mutilate, the Health Services for £13 million out of £4,000 million, what will he do next year? Or are you next year going to take your stand on the upper denture? The lower half apparently does not matter, but the top half is sacrosanct. Is that right? If my Hon. Friends are asked questions at meetings about what they will do next year, what will they say?

The Chancellor of the Exchequer is putting a financial ceiling on the Health Service. With rising prices the Health Service is squeezed between that artificial figure and rising prices. What is to be squeezed `<?pagebreak number="251" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter023.html_p251}out next year? Is it the upper half? When that has been squeezed out and the same principle holds good, what do you squeeze out the year after? Prescriptions? Hospital charges? Where do you stop? I have been accused of having agreed to a charge on prescriptions. That shows the danger of compromise. Because if it is pleaded against me that I agreed to the modification of the Health Service, then what will be pleaded against my Right Hon. Friends next year, and indeed what answer will they have if the vandals opposite come in? What answer? The Health Service will be like Lavinia -- all the limbs cut off and eventually her tongue cut out, too.

I should like to ask my Right Hon. and Hon. Friends, where are they going? (*Hon. Members: 'Where are you going?'*) Where am I going? I am where I always was. Those who live their lives in mountainous and rugged countries are always afraid of avalanches, and they know that avalanches start with the movement of a very small stone. First, the stone starts on a ridge between two valleys -- one valley desolate and the other valley populous. The pebble starts, but nobody bothers about the pebble until it gains way, and soon the whole valley is overwhelmed. That is how the avalanche starts, that is the logic of the present situation, and that is the logic my Right Hon. and Hon. Friends cannot escape. Why, therefore, has it been done in this way?

After all, the National Health Service was something of which we were all very proud, and even the Opposition were beginning to be proud of it. It only had to last a few more years to become a part of our traditions, and then the traditionalists would have claimed the credit for all of it. Why should we throw it away? In the Chancellor's Speech there was not one word of commendation for the Health Service -- not one word. What is responsible for that?

Why has the cut been made? He cannot say, with an overall surplus of over £220 million and a conventional surplus of £39 million, that he had to have the £13 million. That is the arithmetic of Bedlam. He cannot say that his arithmetic is so precise that he must have the £13 million, when last year the Treasury were £247 million out. Why?

What is the cause of it? Why has it been done? ...

I say this, in conclusion. There is only one hope for mankind -- and `<?pagebreak number="252" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter023.html_p252}that is democratic Socialism. There is only one party in Great Britain which can do it -- and that is the Labour Party. But I ask them carefully to consider how far they are polluting the stream. We have gone a long way -- a very long way -- against great difficulties. Do not let us change direction now. Let us make it clear, quite clear, to the rest of the world that we stand where we stood, that we are not going to allow ourselves to be diverted from our path by the exigencies of the immediate situation. We shall do what is necessary to defend ourselves -- defend ourselves by arms, and not only with arms but with the spiritual resources of our people.

> *The speech stunned the House of Commons. Newspapers jeered and even the miners of Durham were critical. Bevan was defeated by Hugh Gaitskell (the chancellor who imposed the health charges) in the contest for the Labour leadership of 1955 but then became official spokesman on foreign affairs.*

•
