## Aneurin Bevan Brighton, 3 October 1957 {#chapter023.html_pen0002210 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'Naked into the conference chamber' {#chapter023.html_pen0002214 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Why has he done it? Why, why, why? was the angry, bemused reaction of the Bevanites, Aneurin Bevan's allies on the left of the Labour Party, after the speech to the party conference in which he opposed resolution 24 calling for unilateral British disarmament.*
>
> *His speech in the 1957 H-bomb debate was the bravest of Bevan's career: he `<?pagebreak number="278" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter023.html_p278}was siding with his old enemy, Hugh Gaitskell, and denouncing the views of his closest political friends. 'I have thought about this very anxiously,' he said. 'I knew that I was going to make a speech that would offend and even hurt many of my friends.' He was interrupted by cries of protest. 'But do you think I am afraid?' There was no answer. 'I shall say what I believe.' This is what Bevan then said.*

If you carry this resolution and follow out all its implications and do not run away from it you will send a British Foreign Secretary, whoever he may be, naked into the conference chamber. Able to preach sermons, of course; he could make good sermons. But action of that sort is not necessarily the way in which you take the menace of this bomb from the world. It might be that action of that sort will still be there available to us if our other actions fail. It is something you can always do. You can always, if the influence you have upon your allies and upon your opponents is not yielding any fruits, take unilateral action of that sort. (*A cry of 'Do it now.'*) 'Do it now,' you say. This is the answer I give from the platform. Do it now as a Labour Party Conference? You cannot do it now. It is not in your hands to do it. All you can do is pass a resolution. What you are saying is that a British Foreign Secretary gets up in the United Nations, without consultation -- mark this; this is a responsible attitude! -- without telling any members of the Commonwealth, without concerting with them, that the British Labour movement decides unilaterally that this country contracts out of all its commitments and obligations entered into with other countries and members of the Commonwealth -- without consultation at all. And you call that statesmanship? I call it an emotional spasm ...

If any Socialist Foreign Secretary is to have a chance he must be permitted to substitute good policies for bad policies. Do not disarm him diplomatically, intellectually, and in every other way before he has a chance to turn round.

This country could be destroyed merely as an incident of a war between Russia and the USA. It is not necessary for any bombs to drop on us. If war broke out between the USA and the Soviet Union, this country would be poisoned with the rest of mankind. What we have, therefore, to consider is how far the policies we are considering `<?pagebreak number="279" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter023.html_p279}can exert an influence and a leverage over the policies of the USA and of the Soviet Union ...

I do seriously believe in the rejection of the bomb. But that is not the issue. That is what I am telling you. If resolution 24 only meant that we would have very little difficulty with it. But if resolution 24 is read with its implications it means that as decent folk you must immediately repudiate all the protection and all the alliances and all the entanglements you have with anybody who uses or possesses or manufactures hydrogen bombs. That is our dilemma. I find it a very, very serious dilemma. This problem is without precedent in the history of the world. I consider that it is not only a question of practical statesmanship ...

No nation is entitled to try to exterminate an evil by invoking a greater evil than the one it is trying to get rid of. The hydrogen bomb is, of course, a greater evil than any evil it is intended to meet. But, unfortunately, the USSR and the USA are in possession of this weapon, and we are in danger of being exterminated as a consequence of their rivalries and their antagonisms. What I would like to have is the opportunity of exerting influence upon the policies of those countries, but this is not the way to do it. You do not give us a chance. It was said to me during the week, 'What is the use of getting up on the platform and saying you are going to stop or suspend the tests?' We have said that already. Are we thinking merely in terms of stronger and stronger resolutions accompanied by no action at all?

I am begging and praying our comrades here to reconsider the demands they have made, because I agree that those who support resolution No. 24 do it with complete sincerity. They do it because they believe that the resolution embodies their detestation of the bomb. But I am sure that in your secret hearts you will admit that you have not fully thought out the implications of that. You have not realized that the consequence of passing that resolution would be to drive Great Britain into a diplomatic purdah.

> *Bevan became deputy leader of the Labour Party in 1959.*

•

[]{#chapter024.html}
