## `<?pagebreak number="280" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter024.html_p280}Enoch Powell House of Commons, 27 July 1959 {#chapter024.html_pen0002229 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'Hola Camp' {#chapter024.html_pen0002233 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Enoch Powell (1912--98) was one of the most gifted, principled and controversial Conservative politicians of his era. Once a professor of Greek (and a future Minister of Health), Powell was still a backbencher when an official inquiry confirmed allegations of brutality at the Kenyan detention camp at Hola, where batons and rifle butts had been used on Mau Mau detainees and ten men had died (allegedly after drinking dirty water). His coruscating speech, insisting on ministerial responsibility, was remembered by many MPs on both sides of the House as the best they ever heard. As Powell ended, he sat down and cried. He said later: 'One of the exhilarations of being a member of the House of Commons, if you experience it, are the moments when you actually have it in your hand, in which you play upon it like an instrument.'*
>
> *The speech remained the most powerful memory of his long career.*

I am as certain of this as I am of anything, that my Right Hon. Friend the Secretary of State from the beginning to the end of this affair is without any jot or tittle of blame for what happened in Kenya, that he could not be expected to know, that it could not be within the administrative conventions that these matters should be brought to his attention before or during the execution. When I say my Right Hon. Friend was in this matter utterly and completely blameless, that is of a piece with his administration of his high office generally, which has been the greatest exercise of the office of Colonial Secretary in modern times. It is in the name of that record, it is in the name of his personal blamelessness, that I beg of him to ensure that the responsibility is recognized and carried where it properly belongs, and is seen to belong.

I have heard it suggested that there were circumstances surrounding this affair at Hola Camp which, it is argued, might justify the passing over of this responsibility -- which might justify one in saying, `<?pagebreak number="281" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter024.html_p281}'Well, of course, strictly speaking, that is quite correct: but then here there were special circumstances.'

It has been said -- and it is a fact -- that these eleven men were the lowest of the low; sub-human was the word which one of my Hon. Friends used. So be it. But that cannot be relevant to the acceptance of responsibility for their death. I know that it does not enter into my Right Hon. Friend's mind that it could be relevant, because it would be completely inconsistent with his whole policy of rehabilitation, which is based upon the assumption that whatever the present state of these men, they can be reclaimed. No one who supports the policy of rehabilitation can argue from the character and condition of these men that responsibility for their death should be different from the responsibility for anyone else's death. In general, I would say that it is a fearful doctrine, which must recoil upon the heads of those who pronounce it, to stand in judgement on a fellow human being and to say, 'Because he was such-and-such, therefore the consequences which would otherwise flow from his death shall not flow.'

It is then said that the morale of the Prison Service, the morale of the whole Colonial Service, is above all important and that whatever we do, whatever we urge, whatever we say, should have regard to that morale. 'Amen' say I. But is it for the morale of the Prison Service that those who executed a policy should suffer -- whether inadequately or not is another question -- and those who authorized it, those to whom they appealed, should be passed over? I cannot believe that that supports the morale of a service.

Going on beyond that, my Hon. Friend the Member for Leicester, South-East (Mr Peel) reminded the House how proud the Colonial Service is of the integrity of its administration and its record. Nothing could be more damaging to the morale of such a service than that there should be a breath of a blemish left upon it. No, sir; that argument from the morale of the Prison Service and the Colonial Service stands on its head if what we mean is that therefore the consequences of responsibility should not follow in this case as they would in any other similar case.

Finally it is argued that this is Africa, that things are different there. Of course they are. The question is whether the difference `<?pagebreak number="282" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter024.html_p282}between things there and here is such that the taking of responsibility there and here should be upon different principles. We claim that it is our object -- and this is something which unites both sides of the House -- to leave representative institutions behind us wherever we give up our rule. I cannot imagine that it is a way to plant representative institutions to be seen to shirk the acceptance and the assignment of responsibility, which is the very essence of responsible government.

Nor can we ourselves pick and choose where and in what parts of the world we shall use this or that kind of standard. We cannot say, 'We will have African standards in Africa, Asian standards in Asia and perhaps British standards here at home.' We have not that choice to make. We must be consistent with ourselves everywhere. All government, all influence of man upon man, rests upon opinion. What we can do in Africa, where we still govern and where we no longer govern, depends upon the opinion which is entertained of the way in which this country acts and the way in which Englishmen act. We cannot, we dare not, in Africa of all places, fall below our own highest standards in the acceptance of responsibility.

•
