## Gideon Hausner Jerusalem, 17--18 April 1961 {#chapter026.html_pen0002415 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'That man was Eichmann' {#chapter026.html_pen0002419 .EB10SmallHead}

> *As a young Nazi SS officer, Adolf Eichmann (1906--62) was appointed head of the Central Office for Jewish Emigration in Vienna in 1938 and from 1942 assumed responsibility for the extinction of unwanted Jewish internees.*
>
> *He supervised the deportation of slave labourers from among them. After the war he fled to South America. He was kidnapped in Argentina by Israeli agents in 1960 and charged with crimes against the Jewish people at his trial in Jerusalem in 1961.*
>
> *As Attorney-General of the State of Israel, Gideon Hausner, at the age of forty-six, led the prosecution of Eichmann -- the spokesman for six million Jews. He spoke for ten hours.*
>
> *The following extracts are from his speeches at the opening and conclusion of the trial.*

When I stand before you, O Judges of Israel, to lead the prosecution of Adolf Eichmann, I do not stand alone. With me here are six million accusers. But they cannot rise to their feet and point their finger `<?pagebreak number="303" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter026.html_p303}at the man in the dock with the cry '*J'accuse'* on their lips. For they are now only ashes -- ashes piled high on the hills of Auschwitz and the fields of Treblinka and strewn in the forests of Poland. Their graves are scattered throughout Europe. Their blood cries out, but their voice is stilled. Therefore will I be their spokesman. In their name will I unfold this terrible indictment ...

... never, down the long, bloodstained road travelled by this people, never since the first days of its nationhood, has any man arisen who succeeded in dealing so grievous a blow as did Hitler and his regime, and Adolf Eichmann, as its executive arm for the destruction of Jewry. Human history knows no other example of a man against whom could be drawn up such a bill of indictment. The deeds of those classic figures of barbarism, Nero, Attila, Genghis Khan, pale into insignificance when set against the abominations, the murderous horrors, which will be presented to you in this trial ... only in our generation has an organized state set upon an entire defenceless and peaceful population, men, women, and children, greybeards and babies, incarcerated them behind electrified fences, imprisoned them in concentration camps, and resolved to destroy them utterly ...

In this trial, we shall encounter a new kind of killer, the kind that exercises his bloody craft behind a desk, and only occasionally does the deed with his own hands ... But it was his word that put gas chambers into action; he lifted the telephone, and railway trains left for the extermination centres; his signature it was that sealed the doom of tens of thousands. He had but to give the order, and troopers took off to rout Jews out of their homes, to beat and torture them and drive them into ghettos, to steal their property and, after brutality and pillage, after all had been wrung from them, when even their hair had been taken, to transport them en masse to their slaughter. Even their dead bodies were not immune. Gold teeth were extracted and wedding rings torn from fingers ...

Eichmann was the one who *planned, initiated and organized,* who instructed others to spill this ocean of blood, and to use all the means of murder, theft and torture. He is responsible, therefore, as though he with his own hands had knotted the hangman's noose, `<?pagebreak number="304" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter026.html_p304}lashed the victims into the gas chambers, shot and thrust into the open pits every single one of the millions who were murdered. Such is his responsibility in the eyes of the law. And such is his responsibility by every standard of conscience and morality. His accomplices in the crime were ... the leaders of a nation -- including professors and scholars, robed dignitaries with academic degrees, educated persons, the 'intelligentsia'. We shall encounter them -- the doctors and lawyers, scholars, bankers and economists -- in those councils which resolved to exterminate the Jews, and among them officers and directors of the work of murder in all its terrible phases ...

... words exist to express what man's reason can conceive and his heart contain, and here we are dealing with actions which transcend our human grasp. Yet this is what did happen: millions were condemned to death, not for any crime, not for anything they had done, but only because they belonged to the Jewish people. The development of technology placed at the disposal of the destroyers efficient equipment for the execution of their appalling designs ...

... there was only one man who had been concerned almost entirely with the Jews, whose business had been their destruction, whose role in the establishment of the iniquitous regime had been limited to them. That man was Adolf Eichmann. If we charge him also with crimes against people who were not Jews, committed, as it were, 'by the way', this is because we make no ethnic distinctions. But we should remember that the mission of the accused, in which for years he saw his destiny and calling, and to which he devoted himself with enthusiasm and endless zeal, was the destruction of the Jews ...

Eichmann will tell you that he carried out the orders of his superiors. But the conscience of the world, speaking with the voice of the International Military Tribunal, has declared that orders contrary to the principles of conscience and morality, orders that violate the essential imperatives on which human society is based and negate the basic rules without which men cannot live together -- such orders constitute no defence, legal or moral. Therefore, in the light of the ruling, our own law in Israel has denied the accused the legal right to submit such a defence. But that is by no means all. We shall prove to `<?pagebreak number="305" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter026.html_p305}the court that he went far beyond his actual orders, that he took the initiative in extermination operations for which he had been given no orders whatsoever, and carried them out only because of his devotion to the task in which he saw his life's mission ...

... the first and principal means of repression used by the SS was the concentration camp, in which were developed and perfected systems of terror employing all the resources available to modern technology. The Nazi, the romantic mystic, the family man, who on the surface seemed to be a loving husband to his wife and a merciful father to his children, the lover of nature, was revealed in the concentration camps as a monster of insane brutality, who did not hesitate to trample on human beings, without blinking an eye, as if they were insects. One of the shocking chapters in *Commandant of Auschwitz* the story of Rudolf Hoess, is the part where Hoess describes his own peaceful family life at home: the education he gave his sons, his affectionate regard for his wife -- and all this going on just on the other side of the high-tension barbed-wire fence of the terrible extermination camp in which between five and ten thousand people were being put to death *each day* -- and sometimes even more.

The Gestapo knew well how to exploit all the human frailties of their victims. They knew that starvation and torture, given time, can break even strong men; that by brutality and humiliation it is possible to efface the divine image, leaving a man insensitive, inert, an obedient robot doing as he is told, even when he is ordered to dig his own grave ... Every means of humiliation was deliberately employed to destroy the Jew's faith in himself. When a man is whipped across the face and he is unable to react; when he is deprived of food until he aches with hunger; when men and women, boys and girls, are given orders to perform their excretory functions in full sight of one another, like beasts; when women are made to run naked before the guards; when, morning and night, executions by shooting and hanging prove that the lives of Jews are absolutely worthless; when senseless butchery takes place before your eyes for the sport of capricious guards; when twenty times a day you are made aware that you are abandoned and defenceless, your life dependent on the mood of any one of the SS men on that particular day -- under such `<?pagebreak number="306" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter026.html_p306}circumstances it was not difficult to create a condition in which most of these unfortunates were stripped of all faith and feeling, bereft for the most part of any will to go on living, their supreme desire being a speedy and painless death ...

The Nazis ... were skilled in lies and chicanery. They knew how to use every expedient to deceive their victims. After every manhunt, in which thousands and tens of thousands of Jews would be sent to their deaths and others would manage to hide or escape, a rumour would be deliberately spread by the Nazis that this was the last operation of its kind, and that the survivors would no longer be touched, that there would be no more transports. Many individuals of the type that cling to hope, those who could not or would not believe that the fate of all the Jews had indeed been sealed, or who were exhausted by hunger, misery and suffering, would venture out of their hiding places or return from the forests, only to be captured by their persecutors in a new manhunt. The tiger played with his victims at his own sweet will. We shall find some Jews among those carrying out Nazi orders, in the Jewish police in the ghettos and in the Councils of Elders. Even at the entrance to the gas chambers there were often Jews whose task it was to calm the victims and persuade them that they were merely going to showers. This was one of the most satanic aspects of the entire programme: to deaden men's senses, to deprive them of all emotional and intellectual vigour, to leave no more than a terrified and lifeless robot, so that it was possible to use the prisoners in the camps themselves as part of the murder machine against their own people ...

You will hear evidence of deeds which the mind of man does not want to believe. You will hear about little ones thrown out of windows of hospitals when they failed to respond to orders that they report for parade.

We shall present to you the instructions issued by Eichmann and his office about the transport of children. One of these said that the children were to be divided among the transports intended for Auschwitz. Children of fourteen were considered 'independent' for purposes of transport to the extermination camps. Nor can we say who suffered the more terrible fate: those who died, or those who `<?pagebreak number="307" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter026.html_p307}concealed themselves in every conceivable hiding-place and crevice, who lived in perpetual terror of expulsion, who survived through the kindness of Christian neighbours who agreed to hide them. Children would come home from the schools and centres organized by the community to find their parents' home was empty, for they had been sent by some 'aktion' or 'operation' to their deaths; and the apartment had in the meantime been occupied by others.

You will hear evidence of tender infants pressed by their mothers to their bodies in the gas chambers so that they should not inhale the poisonous gas, until the executioners came and threw them alive into the furnaces or the waiting graves.

Those unhappy children who lived for years in fear of the beating of a rifle butt on their door; who had been sent by their parents to the woods in an attempt to save them, who had been taught to choke their tears and sighs because a weeping child would be shot on the spot; who had been ordered to deny their origins and pretend to be Christians; who saw their fathers being lashed with whips before their eyes; in front of whom 'discussions' would be carried on by the German executioners as to who should be killed first -- the father or the son; who went to the open grave with 'Hear, O Israel!' on their lips -- these children and youths ... are the very soul and hard core of the indictment. Those Anne Franks and Justine Drangers and a million others.

We shall present the pictures of some of those children swollen with hunger, frightened and crushed, with eyes frozen with terror. We shall show you the photographs of their starved bodies thrown into manure wagons, of the helpless little ones on the threshold of the extermination chambers.

At Auschwitz the killings were carried out by every method, shooting, hanging, and beating, but mainly in the massive gas chambers. In each such chamber 2,000 people were herded together for a 'shower' -- a flow of poison gas. The death factory operated unceasingly. The extermination of 2,000 people lasted 25 minutes, after which the bodies were taken to one of the five giant furnaces. Medical experiments were made on human beings as if they were guinea pigs. Parts of female sex organs were cut out, or limbs were subjected to X-rays until the unfortunate creatures writhed in pain prior to their `<?pagebreak number="308" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter026.html_p308}death. Men were castrated. Experiments were made on the influence of paraffin and petrol injections on human skin and the effects of chemical substances on mental resistance. The methods of punishment would not have shamed the most cruel barbarians in history. Beating on the naked body was a comparatively light punishment. Water was poured into people's ears, fingernails were extracted, prisoners starved until they went out of their minds. In the bunker of those sentenced for punishment by starvation a dead prisoner was found, bent over whom was a second prisoner, also dead, grasping the liver from the corpse of the first. He had died while tearing at the liver of a fellow human being. The Nazi contribution to European culture was the reintroduction of cannibalism ...

We shall prove that the accused performed all these deeds with the set purpose of destroying the Jewish people, wholly or in part. Adolf Eichmann will enjoy a privilege which he did not accord to a single one of his victims. He will be able to defend himself before the court. His fate will be decided according to law and according to the evidence, with the burden of proof resting upon the prosecution. And the judges of Israel will pronounce true and righteous judgement.

It is no wonder that the German Foreign Ministry passed on for Eichmann's information the warning, broadcast by London Radio, that those responsible for the murders in Auschwitz would be brought to judgement. Even on the verge of the German collapse in April 1945, in that atmosphere of the twilight of the gods, when the Allies from the East, West and South were closing in -- Eichmann still told a German Red Cross representative that he could not agree to the more humanitarian methods of dealing with Jews then being considered by Himmler.

Many millions of non-Jews also perished in the Great War. We shall not attempt to decide here, at this trial, which of the acts of hostility were contrary to the laws and customs of war as laid down by international law. But we shall say, with all the emphasis at our command, that the extermination of the Jewish people was not connected with any military action. It cannot be compared with the bombing of cities or with submarine warfare. These were acts of war, and whether they were legitimate or not they were carried out in `<?pagebreak number="309" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter026.html_p309}connection with and in the process of waging war. The extermination of the Jews had no connection with the war effort of Germany and her allies. The extermination was carried out *at the time* of the war, when the battle-smoke to some extent covered and concealed the atrocities; but it was not done in pursuit of war, nor was it impelled by the needs or necessities of war.

> *Eichmann was hanged on 31 May 1962.*

•
