## Hugh Gaitskell Scarborough, 5 October 1961 {#chapter026.html_pen0002448 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'We will fight, fight and fight again' {#chapter026.html_pen0002452 .EB10SmallHead}

> *As leader of the Labour Party since 1955, Hugh Gaitskell (1906--63) had led opposition to the Suez invasion of 1956 but clashed with his left wing over nationalization and unilateral nuclear disarmament.*
>
> *At the 1961 party conference, he faced a challenge to his leadership from Harold Wilson (which he defeated) as well as a resolution seeking to commit Labour to unilateral disarmament.*
>
> *His speech was therefore the most important of his political life. He had not slept the previous night and wrote the peroration at 4 a.m. Gaitskell thought he would lose and be forced to resign the leadership. As he rose to speak he looked overtired and white with tension and he was continually interrupted by boos and howls of protest, particularly when he referred to 'fellow travellers'.*

I would not wish for one day to remain a Leader who had lost the confidence of his colleagues in Parliament. It is perfectly reasonable to try to get rid of somebody, to try to get rid of a man you do not agree with, who you think perhaps is not a good Leader. But there are ways of doing this. What would be wrong, in my opinion, and would not be forgiven, is if, in order to get rid of a man, you supported a policy in which you did not wholeheartedly believe, a policy which, as far as the resolution is concerned, is not clear.

`<?pagebreak number="310" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter026.html_p310}Before you take the vote on this momentous occasion, allow me a last word. Frank Cousins \[leader of the unilateralist Transport and General Workers' Union\] has said this is not the end of the problem. I agree with him. It is not the end of the problem because Labour Members of Parliament will have to consider what they do in the House of Commons. What do you expect of them? You know how they voted in June overwhelmingly for the policy statement. It is not in dispute that the vast majority of Labour Members of Parliament are utterly opposed to unilateralism and neutralism. So what do you expect them to do? Change their minds overnight? To go back on the pledges they gave to the people who elected them from their constituencies? And supposing they did do that. Supposing all of us, like well-behaved sheep, were to follow the policies of unilateralism and neutralism, what kind of an impression would that make upon the British people? You do not seem to be clear in your minds about it, but I will tell you this. I do not believe that the Labour Members of Parliament are prepared to act as time servers. I do not believe they will do this, and I will tell you why: because they are men of conscience and honour. People of the so-called Right and so-called Centre have every justification for having a conscience, as well as people of the so-called Left. I do not think they will do this because they are honest men, loyal men, steadfast men, experienced men, with a lifetime of service to the Labour Movement.

There are other people too, not in Parliament, in the Party who share our convictions. What sort of people do you think they are? What sort of people do you think we are? Do you think we can simply accept a decision of this kind? Do you think that we can become overnight the pacifists, unilateralists and fellow travellers that other people are? How wrong can you be? As wrong as you are about the attitude of the British people.

In a few minutes the Conference will make its decision. Most of the votes, I know, are predetermined and we have been told what is likely to happen. We know how it comes about. I sometimes think, frankly, that the system we have, by which great unions decide their policy before even their conferences can consider the Executive recommendation, is not really a very wise one or a good one. Perhaps in a calmer moment this situation could be looked at.

`<?pagebreak number="311" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter026.html_p311}I say this to you: we may lose the vote today and the result may deal this Party a grave blow. It may not be possible to prevent it, but I think there are many of us who will not accept that this blow need be mortal, who will not believe that such an end is inevitable. There are some of us, Mr Chairman, who will fight and fight and fight again to save the Party we love. We will fight and fight and fight again to bring back sanity and honesty and dignity, so that our Party with its great past may retain its glory and its greatness.

It is in that spirit that I ask delegates who are still free to decide how they vote, to support what I believe to be a realistic policy on defence, which yet could so easily have united the great Party of ours, and to reject what I regard as the suicidal path of unilateral disarmament which will leave our country defenceless and alone.

> *Gaitskell was greeted by the biggest ovation of his life and one journalist wrote that this was his finest hour. Although the Left won the vote, the margin was only 300,000 instead of the expected million or more. Gaitskell's political courage and integrity and his appeal to those 'still free to decide' switched votes and turned a triumph into a hollow victory.*

•
