## `<?pagebreak number="320" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter027.html_p320}Hugh Gaitskell Brighton, 3 October 1962 {#chapter027.html_pen0002529 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The end of a thousand years of history' {#chapter027.html_pen0002533 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Hugh Gaitskell was a fighter, a politician with a stubborn faith in the power of reasoned argument. A year earlier he had defeated a challenge to his leadership and won acceptance for his opposition to unilateral disarmament. Now he was determining the policy of the Labour Party on joining the European Common Market, the issue that has dominated and divided British politics ever since. To the anguish of his right-wing supporters, most of whom backed entry into Europe, Gaitskell swung the party into a position of hostility towards the Common Market.*
>
> *No other living British politician could have so dominated a mass conference by the sheer force of intellect and personality, said Anthony Crosland, one of Gaitskell's friends. Yet Dora, Gaitskell's wife, observed during the standing ovation: 'All the wrong people are cheering.'*

I understand and deeply sympathize with the people of France and of Germany in their desire to get rid of the conflicts which have so often broken out between them and which indeed are all too fresh in our minds. But I sometimes wonder whether the great problems of the world today are to be found in the unity or disunity of Western Europe. I would have said there were two problems outstanding above all others: the problem of peace and the problems of poverty; the problem of East--West relations that plagues us and the problem of the division of the world into the 'haves' and the 'have nots'.

I know some will say with great sincerity: 'But we recognize that and we believe that by Britain going into Europe a great contribution can be made to these problems.' Maybe so, but it is for them to submit the proof. So far it is hard to be convinced. For although, of course, Europe has had a great and glorious civilization, although Europe can claim Goethe and Leonardo, Voltaire and Picasso, there have been evil features in European history too -- Hitler and Mus`<?pagebreak number="321" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter027.html_p321}solini and today the attitude of some Europeans to the Congo problem, the attitude of at least one European government to the United Nations. You cannot say what this Europe will be: it has its two faces and we do not know as yet which is the one which will dominate.

But here is another question we have to ask; what exactly is involved in the concept of political union? We hear a lot about it; we are told that the Economic Community is not just a customs union, that all who framed it saw it as a stepping stone towards political integration. We ought to be told what is meant by that, for if this be true our entry into the Common Market carries with it some very serious political obligations. But when you ask it is not easy to get a clear answer ...

I can see only three possibilities outside the obligations that we accept specifically in the Treaty of Rome. It may mean that there is no obligation upon the Government of Britain to do more than talk, consult more frequently with the President of France and the Chancellor of Germany. I see no harm in these talks, but I am not terribly optimistic about what they will produce ...

But what else? If it is not just talking, what is it? The second possibility is majority decisions on political issues, just as we are to have majority decisions on economic issues. Do we want that? Well, I suppose you might say we would be able somehow or other to outvote those we disagree with. I would like to be very sure of that before I committed myself.

Then, of course, there is the idea and the ideal of Federal Europe. Now I know it will be said by some, 'Why bring up federation? It is not immediate, it is not imposed upon us, it may not happen.' But we would be foolish to deny, not to recognize and indeed sympathize with the desire of those who created the Economic Community for political federation. That is what they mean, that is what they are after when they admit freely that under the present constitution of EEC the Assembly has no powers except the very far-reaching, overriding one, which they are most unlikely to use, of dismissing the Commission by a two-thirds majority. When it is pointed out that the Commission is a body which has powers but is not responsible `<?pagebreak number="322" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter027.html_p322}or under anybody's control, what is the answer? The answer they give us: 'That is why we should set up a Federal Assembly with powers over them.' This is what they are arguing.

What does federation mean? It means that powers are taken from national governments and handed over to federal governments and to federal parliaments. It means -- I repeat it -- that if we go into this we are no more than a state (as it were) in the United States of Europe, such as Texas and California. They are remarkably friendly examples, you do not find every state as rich or having such good weather as those two! But I could take others: it would be the same as in Australia, where you have Western Australia, for example, and New South Wales. We should be like them. This is what it means; it does mean the end of Britain as an independent nation state. It may be a good thing or a bad thing but we must recognize that this is so ...

We must be clear about this: it does mean, if this is the idea, the end of Britain as an independent European state. I make no apology for repeating it. It means the end of a thousand years of history. You may say, 'Let it end,' but, my goodness, it is a decision that needs a little care and thought. And it does mean the end of the Commonwealth. How can one really seriously suppose that if the mother country, the centre of the Commonwealth, is a province of Europe (which is what federation means) it could continue to exist as the mother country of a series of independent nations? It is sheer nonsense.

> *Although nobody knew it at the time, Gaitskell was making his last speech to a Labour Party conference. He died unexpectedly early the following year and his epitaph from his political allies was that he was the greatest prime minister who never was.*

[•]{.center}

[]{#chapter028.html}
