## Harold Wilson Scarborough, 1 October 1963 {#chapter029.html_pen0002662 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The white heat of technology' {#chapter029.html_pen0002666 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Harold Wilson (1916--95) became leader of the Labour Party in 1963 after the death of Hugh Gaitskell. His challenge to the Tories, now led after the retirement of Harold Macmillan by the aristocratic Sir Alec Douglas-Home, was mounted with dramatic effect at the Labour Party conference, an annual platform for a major speech by the party leader.*
>
> *In a speech that was rewritten during the small hours of the morning, Wilson summoned Labour to embrace the cult of the new and to harness the white heat of the technological revolution, and identified himself with the technicians and white-coat workers. There should be more scientists in government, he urged, more investment in scientific research and a new minister of technology. There was no room in the Labour movement for Luddites or antique working practices.*
>
> *The contrast between Wilson and Douglas-Home, who confessed to doing his sums with matchsticks, was dramatic. 'We are living in the jet age,' Wilson said in other speeches, 'but we are governed by an Edwardian establishment mentality.' Wilson's message swept the political board. After twelve years of Tory rule, `<?pagebreak number="334" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter029.html_p334}it chimed with the public mood and was compared to President Kennedy's 'new frontier'.*

We are redefining and we are restating our Socialism in terms of the scientific revolution. But that revolution cannot become a reality unless we are prepared to make far-reaching changes in economic and social attitudes which permeate our whole system of society.

The Britain that is going to be forged in the white heat of this revolution will be no place for restrictive practices or for outdated methods on either side of industry. We shall need a totally new attitude to the problems of apprenticeship, of training and retraining for skill. If there is one thing where the traditional philosophy of capitalism breaks down it is in training for apprenticeship, because quite frankly it does not pay any individual firm, unless it is very altruistic or quixotic or farsighted, to train apprentices if it knows at the end of the period of training they will be snapped up by some unscrupulous firm that makes no contribution to apprenticeship training. That is what economists mean when they talk about the difference between marginal private cost and net social cost.

So we are going to need a new attitude. In some industries we shall have to get right away from the idea of apprenticeship to a single firm. There will have to be apprenticeship with the industry as a whole, and the industry will have to take responsibility for it. Indeed, if we are going to end demarcation and snobbery in our training for skill and for science why should not these apprenticeship contracts be signed with the State itself? Then again, in the Cabinet room and the board room alike those charged with the control of our affairs must be ready to think and to speak in the language of our scientific age.

For the commanding heights of British industry to be controlled today by men whose only claim is their aristocratic connections or the power of inherited wealth or speculative finance is as irrelevant to the twentieth century as would be the continued purchase of commissions in the armed forces by lordly amateurs. At the very time that even the MCC has abolished the distinction between amateurs and professionals, in science and industry we are content to remain a nation of Gentlemen in a world of Players.

`<?pagebreak number="335" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter029.html_p335}For those of us who have studied the formidable Soviet challenge in the education of scientists and technologists, and above all, in the ruthless application of scientific techniques in Soviet industry, know that our future lies not in military strength alone but in the efforts, the sacrifices, and above all the energies which a free people can mobilize for the future greatness of our country. Because we are democrats, we reject the methods which Communist countries are deploying in applying the results of scientific research to industrial life, but because we care deeply about the future of Britain, we must use all the resources of democratic planning, all the latent and underdeveloped energies and skills of our people, to ensure Britain's standing in the world. That is the message which I believe will go out from this Conference to the people of Britain and to the people of the world.

> *The speech was greeted with a long standing ovation. Almost every correspondent was instantly seduced by Wilson's pseudo-scientific jargon, a disenchanted critic wrote later. Yet it had a big impact on floating middle-class voters and Wilson became prime minister in 1964. He won two subsequent elections in 1966 and 1974 and retired in 1976.*

[•]{.center}
