## Roy Jenkins London, 23 May 1966 {#chapter031.html_pen0002916 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'This is the goal' {#chapter031.html_pen0002920 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Roy Jenkins (1920--2003) was one of the great reforming Labour home secretaries of twentieth-century British politics as well as one of the best chancellors.*
>
> *He quickly determined to strike a more upbeat note on race relations and `<?pagebreak number="363" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter031.html_p363}wanted to provide a 'favourable splash' for the launching of Mark Bonham Carter as the first chairman of the new Race Relations Board. The speech was memorable in its definition of racial integration, which became one of the most provocative issues in British politics in the 1960s.*
>
> *The weekend before the speech Jenkins stayed in the Provost's Lodge at King's College, Cambridge. 'On the Saturday evening,' he wrote in his memoirs, 'we went to the Founder's Obit Service in the chapel, during which, in the obscurity of the provostial stalls, I continued to scribble away ...' That was when he wrote the passage about the universities and culture, of which he was subsequently 'rather proud'.*

Integration is perhaps rather a loose word. I do not regard it as meaning the loss, by immigrants, of their own national characteristics and culture. I do not think that we need in this country a 'melting-pot', which will turn everybody out in a common mould, as one of a series of carbon copies of someone's misplaced vision of the stereotyped Englishman.

It would be bad enough if that were to occur to the relatively few in this country who happen to have pure Anglo-Saxon blood in their veins. If it were to happen to the rest of us, to the Welsh (like myself), to the Scots, to the Irish, to the Jews, to the mid-European, and to still more recent arrivals, it would be little short of a national disaster. It would deprive us of most of the positive advantages of immigration, which, as I shall develop in a moment, I believe to be very great indeed.

I define integration, therefore, not as a flattening process of assimilation but as equal opportunity, accompanied by cultural diversity, in an atmosphere of mutual tolerance. This is the goal. We may fall a little short of its full attainment, as have other communities both in the past and in the present. But if we are to maintain any sort of world reputation for civilized living and social cohesion, we must get far nearer to its achievement than is the case today. In so far as this is something which can be brought about by Government action, this is now a Home Office responsibility. I welcome this. We have traditionally had the responsibility for the control of admission -- of aliens for many years past, and more recently of Commonwealth `<?pagebreak number="364" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter031.html_p364}citizens. I regard this as a distasteful but necessary duty. My instincts are all against the restriction of free movement, whether for work or education or pleasure, from one country to another. Distasteful though it may be, however, it remains a duty.

In present circumstances we are bound, as almost everyone now recognizes, to contain the flow of immigrants within the economic and social capacity of the country to absorb them -- the social factor being for the moment, I believe, more restrictive than the economic. There are of course differing views about that absorptive capacity, but the Government has a clear responsibility to see that it is not put so high as to create a widespread resistance to effective integration policies. Equally it must not be so unreasonably low as to create an embittered sense of apartness in the immigrant community itself. But this will depend, in my view, not only on the numerical decisions but on the way these decisions are administered; and it is my firm intention to do so as sympathetically as I possibly can, especially when dealing with hard borderline cases.

There are some people, many of them by no means illiberal, who believe that if everybody would only stay at home in their own countries, the world would be a much easier and better place. From this view I firmly dissent. Easier it might conceivably be, but certainly not better or more civilized or innovating.

For centuries past this and every other country which has played a part in the mainstream of world events has benefited immensely from its immigrants. Some of them came in much more aggressive ways than those we are discussing today, but at least from the Norman Conquest, to the wave of German and Austrian and Czechoslovak refugees in the thirties, we have been constantly stimulated and jolted out of our natural island lethargy by a whole series of immigrations. Those who came were always made unwelcome by some people, but they have rarely failed to make a contribution out of proportion to their numbers. If anyone doubts this let them look at British business today, and at the phenomenal extent to which the more successful companies have been founded -- or rejuvenated -- by men whose origin was outside these islands.

But this is not merely a matter of business. Where in the world is `<?pagebreak number="365" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter031.html_p365}there a university which could preserve its fame, or a cultural centre which would keep its eminence, or a metropolis which could hold its drawing power if it were to turn inwards and serve only its own hinterland and its own racial group? To live apart, for a person, a city, a country, is to lead a life of declining intellectual stimulation.

Nor should we underestimate the special contribution which has been made by the recent immigrants from the West Indies, from India and Pakistan, and from other Commonwealth countries. Some are highly gifted with outstanding talents in a wide variety of human activities. They and many others are making a major contribution to our national welfare and prosperity. They work in our hospitals as doctors and nurses, they build houses and run transport services in our cities. They help to fill the many labour shortages, particularly in urban areas, particularly in vital but undermanned public services which go with a full employment society.

Let there be no suggestion therefore that immigration, in reasonable numbers, is a cross we have to bear, and no pretence that if only those who have come could find jobs back at home, our problems could be at an end. So far from this being the case, our doctor shortage would become still more chronic; many of our hospitals and institutions, particularly those performing tasks (like the care of the aged) which are medically unglamorous but socially essential, would have to close down; and our urban public transport systems would be reduced to skeleton services with mounting public inconvenience and a disastrous effect upon private car road congestion.

There is therefore no overall rational basis for resentment of the coloured immigrant population in our midst. Far from hindering our successful national development, they positively help it. But resentment does not always spring from rational causes, particularly when, as is the case with coloured immigrants, their skin and their cultural differences make them natural targets for those who are looking for scapegoats.

A few people, whether out of political opportunism or personal inadequacy, have deliberately whipped up prejudice, playing on fear and ignorance, and blaming the immigrants for problems which were none of their making -- but which stemmed from previous parsimony in housing, schools and welfare services. Of course there are `<?pagebreak number="366" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter031.html_p366}some who have legitimate individual grievances against an immigrant, just as white men can have against white men, or black men against black men. But this is not the root of the problem. The root is community prejudice, and it is that with which, whether it springs from fear or inadequacy or less reputable motives, we have to deal.

I say *have to deal* because I am perfectly sure, first, that American experience, although it can sometimes be misleading in this field, shows clearly that this is not a problem which solves itself without positive action; and, secondly, because, unless we can solve it this will be a major blot on our record for the rest of this century, a constant source of weakness abroad, a handicap to full economic development ...

The task which confronts us all is a crucial but not a daunting one. We have a population which is only two per cent coloured, although the proportion is of course appreciably higher in some areas. More important perhaps is the fact that we have as yet no established habit of hostility or bitterness on either side of the colour frontier. Such a habit could grow and grow quickly but it is hardly there yet. The problem is too new for that. We therefore start not indeed with a clean slate -- there are already a few ugly marks upon it, but they are still relatively few.

But what we do have in this country is a great absorptive and adaptative tradition. For three centuries we have softened civil conflicts and adjusted our political system to the demands of a constantly changing economic and class structure. The problem we are discussing today makes less demands upon our capacity for tolerance and change than many which we have successfully surmounted in the past. But the way in which we face it, particularly in the next few years, can have a great effect upon our future. If we overcome we shall have a new message to offer the world. If we fail we shall be building up, both inside and outside the country, vast difficulties for future generations of English people.

[•]{.center}

[]{#chapter032.html}
