## `<?pagebreak number="377" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter033.html_p377}Melina Mercouri Washington, 23 January 1968 {#chapter033.html_pen0003030 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'We will be free' {#chapter033.html_pen0003034 .EB10SmallHead}

> *The Greek film actress and politician Melina Mercouri (1923--94) was born into a political family. Her grandfather was mayor of Athens and her father was deputy mayor and Minister of State. Against her parents' wishes, she became an actress and is still remembered for her dazzling performance in the film *Never on Sunday*. After 1967, however, she devoted all her energy to campaigning against the military junta -- the Greek colonels -- who seized power and imposed a dictatorship in 1967. She was declared an enemy of the state and lived in exile in Paris and the United States.*
>
> *She made this powerful speech to the Women's Democratic Club. This is the first half. She went on to plead with the United States to help Greece instead of aiding the colonels and asked: 'Is America the moral leader of the world -- or is it not?'*

I have been asked to speak on the subject 'The Artist and Politics'. I'll try to do so. But I must immediately tell you that I consider the artist no less a citizen than anyone else. And I believe that those who say the artist has no place in politics not only would strip him of his citizenship but would also deny all of history. I know that some artists have accepted the address of the ivory tower. Perhaps they are comfortable, but they collaborate with those who want them excluded from the movement of the world.

I am an artist by vocation and profession. I am a citizen by obligation and responsibility. And as an actress I am happiest when I work in a play or a film that makes both artistic and social contribution.

There is a beautiful story about Picasso. It was during the Nazi occupation in France. The great painter was summoned to Gestapo headquarters. He found a Nazi officer studying one of Picasso's most famous paintings. The canvas depicted the brutal destruction `<?pagebreak number="378" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter033.html_p378}of the town of Guernica by the Nazis during the Spanish Civil War. The Gestapo man looked with menace at Picasso and pointed to the painting.

'Did you do this?' he asked. Picasso looked at the Nazi and said, 'No, you did.'

That was a fine moment. A moment when the artist and the citizen were one. I am a Greek artist, a Greek citizen. Technically, perhaps there might be some question of this. When the military junta seized power in Greece and destroyed the constitution and the freedom of my people, I spoke out against them. The colonels then declared me *anti-Greek*. They announced that my citizenship was taken away and my property confiscated. Perhaps they have the means to take my property. That is physical and tangible. But my citizenship is within me. I drank it with my mother's milk. It is my identity. It is my love for Greece, for my friends, for Greek music and art.

It is my soul. And as the Russian girl says in the story, 'My soul they cannot touch.'

Like everything else, dictatorship has its textbooks and manuals. One of the first things to do is to silence the artist. The artist by his very nature, must have the most immediate, the most intimate contact with people. His life is communication. And dictatorship would keep the people incommunicado. So beware of the artist who *informs*, who exposes, who inspires, who enflames. Silence the composer Mikis Theodorakis. He might write another 'La Marseillaise'. Beware even of the dead. Sophocles, Euripides, Aeschylus, those giant artists, those giant citizens, are censored in Greece. They are dangerous because they wrote of freedom and the excellence of man. This junta stands for slavery and the degradation of man.

The artist is never attacked as such. Ibsen, Shelley, Byron, Keats, Picasso, Leger, Rivera, Joyce, Sinyavsky, Pasternak, Miller, Charlie Chaplin and countless more all through history, were attacked not because they were artists, but because they used their art to uplift, to expose, to protest, to make man better, to make man free.

So, I think I have made myself clear. I am here to talk politically. *Politically*, not *politics*. I am not a politician. Politicians are more dangerous than artists and often funnier.

`<?pagebreak number="379" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter033.html_p379}In 1964 the people of Greece having fought for free elections proceeded to choose the Centre-Union Party to govern Greece. They elected George Papandreou to be prime minister. And this by a majority without precedent in Greece. I will immediately confess to you that I am not an admirer of George Papandreou but, of course, that is beside the point. The people of Greece voted for him. I was not quite sure of his liberalism but to the conservatives and the extreme right wing he was considered a dangerous radical. He *did* talk of reform, a more fair distribution of wealth and free education. This obviously made him a Bolshevik. He took every opportunity to denounce the Communists in Greece, but that did not stop his enemies from calling him a 'sympathizer', a 'fellow traveller' or a 'bedfellow'. We know these clichés in Greece just as well as you do. But it didn't work. His popular support remained strong.

Yet on 15 July 1965, Greece was stunned to learn that he had been dismissed from office by King Constantine and his government was dissolved. The country was shocked. The eyebrows of constitutional experts were raised in horror.

Why was he so rudely and illegally dismissed? He and his son Andreas, the Minister of Economic Co-ordination, insisted that the army needed some reorganization. They naively believed that the army's loyalty should be to the constitution and the government and not to the extreme right or to the palace.

And in 1967 the world learned how right they were.

On 21st April of that year the army tanks crashed through the streets of Athens and democracy was destroyed.

But let me talk a little of those two years between 1965 and 1967. Nothing makes me angrier than to read those so-called 'authorities' who say that prior to the coming of the junta, Greece was in political chaos. I have seen this statement repeated a thousand times and it makes my blood boil. Who created this chaos?

For two years after the dismissal of the freely elected government the palace made repeated attempts to create a government of its own. But always with unpopular, right-wing elements and not one of them could stand up. It drives me crazy to hear this chaos attributed to the forces of democracy. You all remember the definition of the `<?pagebreak number="380" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter033.html_p380}Hebrew word 'chutzpah'. 'Chutzpah' is when a man kills his mother and father and then asks for clemency on the grounds that he is an orphan.

I shall not dwell upon the role of King Constantine except to make a short review. He created the crisis. Then when the junta came, and all of Greece would have supported him if he opposed them, he made no move. He himself swore in the junta. He himself collaborated in the elimination from the army of all democratic elements. He said that he behaved this way to spare Greece from shedding its blood. But eight months later when he saw his own position threatened, he asked the Greek people to shed its blood to save his crown. His counter-coup was a pitiful operetta, a masterpiece of ineptitude, a tragic farce. Now he is in Rome working out a deal for an ignominious return. He is a king without a people, a king of shreds and patches. And I charge that those individuals and those governments who are working for his return do so with the knowledge that he will never have the support of the people. So here we are. Greece that made the gift of democracy to the world is in chains. The constitution destroyed, parliament dissolved, trade unions illegal. The civil services, the schools, the church have been purged. The press, the artist, totally censored and muzzled. The court martials make a mockery of justice. The junta rules by terror, by imprisonment and by torture. And when I say torture, it is not a phrase. The authenticated stories and checked reports of inhuman tortures are at the same time revolting and heartbreaking. I shall spare you the details but if you really want to know them ask me and I will tell you. And then there is the most horrible crime of all, the plot to corrupt the youth of Greece. The school system is being completely revised, the textbooks are being rewritten, teachers who believe in democracy are thrown out of the schools. The young people are being taught ideals that are Nazi. The junta's intention is to create a generation of fascists. And so there is the most terrible of fears, the father afraid of his son. The son afraid of his father, the teacher afraid of his student.

How then are the Greek people to understand the apologists for this medieval, this barbarous regime? I could understand approval `<?pagebreak number="381" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter033.html_p381}from the dead Hitler, from the dead Mussolini, from the dead Stalin, but how can I understand the *live* Dean Acheson?

In a letter to the *Washington Post*, Mr Acheson expressed an opinion that authoritarian rule is what the Greeks need. Now we all know that Mr Acheson is an honourable man, yet he comes to bury democracy in Greece. He is an honourable man and he adds his spadeful of earth into democracy's grave. Evil tongues say that Mr Acheson has a pique against the former Greek government because they rejected his solution to the Cyprus issue. I must doubt this because Mr Acheson is an honourable man. It is his honourable judgement that the people of Greece are ignorant and backward and not ready for democracy. I am only an unlearned actress and the honourable Mr Acheson is a former secretary of state, yet I will stand up to my full height and say, 'Mr Secretary, you are wrong. You are tragically wrong. We know the meaning of democracy. We invented it. We will refuse your counsel, Mr Secretary. We will be free.'

> *The speech was read into the Congressional record by Don Edwards of California. Mercouri returned to Greece in 1974 after the fall of the colonels and became Minister of Culture from 1981 to 1990. She led the campaign, so far unsuccessful, to persuade the British government to return the Elgin Marbles.*

[•]{.center}
