## Michael Foot Blackpool, 29 September 1976 {#chapter035.html_pen0003349 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'The red flame of Socialist courage' {#chapter035.html_pen0003353 .EB10SmallHead}

> *Michael Foot* *(1913*--*2010)* *was one of the great dissenters and romantics of British politics, a man whose heroes were Swift, Hazlitt and Byron. He identified with the Levellers as well as Cromwell and Whigs as well as Nonconformists. According to the British historian Kenneth O. Morgan, he embodied a powerful creative thrust of popular radicalism that has been constant in British public life for two centuries.*
>
> *Foot was also a magnificent orator, at his best when defying and denouncing `<?pagebreak number="419" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter035.html_p419}Tories and defending his beloved Labour Party against the slurs and sneers of its opponents. After years as a rebel on the left wing of the Party, he became Secretary of State for Employment in Harold Wilson's third government in 1974.*
>
> *Trade unionists were angry with the Labour government in 1976. It was dealing with an inflation rate of twenty per cent and the unions were opposing government intervention in collective wage bargaining and wanted utterly to reject statutory incomes control.*
>
> *On the first day of the Labour Party conference, Foot, for many years the idol of the conference as the bitterest critic of official policies but now a Cabinet minister, made a dramatic appeal to the conference to endorse the Wilson government's anti-inflation policy. If they failed to support the government's policy, he said in a passionate speech, they could bring about the end of the Labour government.*

No one is less surprised than myself that this Conference has been dominated, and will continue to be dominated in my judgement, by the rising anxieties and fears and anger of our people about unemployment up and down this country ... Unemployment on this level is totally unacceptable to the Labour Movement. Of course, our unemployment is part of an affliction affecting the whole Western world; the Western world is gripped by the most complex and perilous recession which we have seen since 1945. It is indeed, in my judgement, a crisis of Capitalism of a most formidable character, and we have to muster all our energies, all our skill, to deal with it.

Let me start therefore by telling you what is my deepest instinct about the whole of this situation; it is of first importance for our country, and no less for our Labour Movement, that this crisis should be faced and surmounted by a Labour Government acting in the closest alliance and good faith with the trade-union movement of this country. (*Applause*.) If we were to fall apart, I shudder to think what would be the consequences for our people, for our young people and old alike, in unemployment and in all the other associated consequences. I shudder to think also what would be the consequence for our democratic institutions themselves. It is only three or four years ago that a Conservative Government used the opportunity which we gave them after 1970 to introduce the most insidious `<?pagebreak number="420" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter035.html_p420}attack on trade unionism in this country which we have seen in this century.

If we were ever fools enough to allow them to get the levers of power again, the whips would be changed to scorpions for our chastisement. Let us not make any mistake about that ...

People sometimes say: we will agree to some arrangement between the Government and the trade unions about wages, but only when you have the full panoply of Socialist measures actually put into full operation. I understand the argument, but I say it is unworkable. There is not a single Government in the world aspiring to change society that could work upon that system of transition, whether it is Communist, Maoist, Yugoslav, anything. Of course you could not work on that basis, and so I say, for anyone to argue that there shall be no concession to a Labour Government on these measures until all the other measures are in operation, that is not merely a recipe for the destruction of this Labour Government, it is a recipe for the destruction of any Labour Government. That has to be faced, too.

I am very glad that this Conference is going to be dominated also by the demand for new systems of investment, in the National Enterprise Board and the planning agreements and all the other matters that we have discussed and which we have had in our Party programmes. Of course, that is of paramount importance. But do not let anybody imagine that investment is a soft option. Investment is not a soft option. You can learn it from *Das Kapital* as well as from anywhere else, and I hope I will not be convicted for that. You can read it all there. Investment means very often, almost always, forgoing present claims in order to have future benefits. And you can do it by not so many methods. You can do it by the brutal capitalist methods of the nineteenth century, or you can do it by the equally brutal, or maybe even more outrageous, methods of twentieth-century Stalinism, or you can do it by the politics of persuasion, by the Social Contract. You can do it that way. You can do it the democratic way, which is the heart and soul of our Labour Movement, and always has been. And it is that method by which we are going to seek for our success.

We must face the crisis, beat the inflation, start the regeneration `<?pagebreak number="421" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter035.html_p421}of British industry, lift this scourge of unemployment from our people. This is what we must do. It is the greatest summons that has come to our Labour Party in the seventy-five years of its existence.

We face an economic typhoon of unparalleled ferocity, the worst the world has seen since the 1930s. Joseph Conrad wrote a book called *Typhoon*, and at the end he told people how to deal with it. He said, 'Always facing it, Captain McWhirr: that's the way to get through.' Always facing it, that is the way we have got to solve this problem. We do not want a Labour Movement that tries to dodge it; we do not want people in a Labour Cabinet to try to dodge it. We want people who are prepared to show how they are going to face it, and we need the united support of the Labour Movement to achieve it.

I believe that we can make this Conference one of the greatest in our history, not by stifling dissent or criticism or debate, however ferociously the criticisms may be put: of course not. Indeed, there would not be any life left in this Party if it had not been for those prepared to come along and advocate sometimes unpopular opinions and stand up for them, and discover that those unpopular opinions sometimes became accepted. So I am not asking for any dull uniformity or anything of the sort. I am asking this Movement to exert itself as it has never done before, to show the qualities which we have, the Socialist imagination that exists in our Movement, the readiness to re-forge the alliance, stronger than ever, between the Government and the trade unions, and above all to show the supreme quality in politics, the red flame of Socialist courage. That is what we have got to do to save our country, and that is what can come from this Conference. (*Applause. A standing ovation.*)

> *When Harold Wilson resigned in 1976, James Callaghan defeated Michael Foot for the leadership of the Labour Party and became prime minister. Foot became leader of the House of Commons and succeeded Callaghan in 1980 as leader of the party which had been defeated in the 1979 general election by Margaret Thatcher. Foot was beaten by Margaret Thatcher in the election of 1983. He retired from the House of Commons in 1992.*

[•]{.center}

[]{#chapter036.html}
