## `<?pagebreak number="422" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter036.html_p422}Alexander Solzhenitsyn Cambridge, Massachusetts, 8 June 1978 {#chapter036.html_pen0003372 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'What is the joy about?' {#chapter036.html_pen0003376 .EB10SmallHead}

> *After serving in the Red Army and being decorated for bravery during the Second World War, Alexander Solzhenitsyn* *(1918*--*2008)* *was sent to a labour camp from 1945 to 1953 after making critical remarks about Stalin in letters to a friend. He was then sent into exile in Siberia until 1956.*
>
> One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich*,* *his novel exposing the misery of Stalin's 'gulags', was published in 1962 and approved by Khrushchev. His experience of the gulags also inspired* Cancer Ward*,* The First Circle *and* The Gulag Archipelago*,* *all of which were banned.*
>
> *Although Solzhenitsyn was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1970, he was harangued in the Soviet press, charged with treason and sent into exile in 1974 after* The Gulag Archipelago *was published in the West*.
>
> *As this speech at Harvard University's annual commencement ceremony demonstrated, Solzhenitsyn did not trumpet his gratitude to the West. Instead he denounced a Western way of life that he saw as spoilt, silly and empty of spiritual values.*

A decline in courage may be the most striking feature which an outside observer notices in the West today. The Western world has lost its civic courage, both as a whole and separately, in each country, in each government, in each political party and, of course, in the United Nations. Such a decline in courage is particularly noticeable among the ruling and intellectual élites, causing an impression of a loss of courage by the entire society. There remain many courageous individuals, but they have no determining influence on public life. Political and intellectual functionaries exhibit this depression, passivity and perplexity in their actions and in their statements, and even more so in their self-serving rationales as to how realistic, reasonable and intellectually and even morally justified it is to base state policies on weakness and cowardice ...

`<?pagebreak number="423" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter036.html_p423}Must one point out that from ancient times a decline in courage has been considered the beginning of the end? ...

When the modern Western states were being formed, it was proclaimed as a principle that governments are meant to serve man and that man lives in order to be free and pursue happiness. (See, for example, the American Declaration of Independence.) Now at last during past decades technical and social progress has permitted the realization of such aspirations: the welfare state. Every citizen has been granted the desired freedom and material goods in such quantity and of such quality as to guarantee in theory the achievement of happiness, in the debased sense of the word which has come into being during those same decades. (In the process, however, one psychological detail has been overlooked: the constant desire to have still more things and a still better life, and the struggle to this end imprints many Western faces with worry and even depression, though it is customary to carefully conceal such feelings. This active and tense competition comes to dominate all human thought and does not in the least open a way to free spiritual development.) The individual's independence from many types of state pressure has been guaranteed; the majority of the people have been granted well-being to an extent their fathers and grandfathers could not even dream about; it has become possible to raise young people according to these ideals, preparing them for and summoning them towards physical bloom, happiness, possession of material goods, money and leisure, towards an almost unlimited freedom in the choice of pleasures. So who should now renounce all this, why and for the sake of what should one risk one's precious life in defence of the common good, and particularly in the nebulous case when the security of one's nation must be defended in an as yet distant land?

Even biology tells us that a high degree of habitual well-being is not advantageous to a living organism. Today, well-being in the life of Western society has begun to reveal its pernicious mask ...

Should I be asked whether I would propose the West, such as it is today, as a model to my country, I would frankly have to answer negatively. No, I could not recommend your society as an ideal for the transformation of ours. Through deep suffering, people in our `<?pagebreak number="424" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter036.html_p424}country have now achieved a spiritual development of such intensity that the Western system in its present state of spiritual exhaustion does not look attractive. Even those characteristics of your life which I have just enumerated are extremely saddening.

A fact which cannot be disputed is the weakening of human personality in the West, while in the East it has become firmer and stronger. Six decades for our people and three decades for the people of Eastern Europe; during that time we have been through a spiritual training far in advance of Western experience. The complex and deadly crush of life has produced stronger, deeper and more interesting personalities than those generated by standardized Western wellbeing. Therefore, if our society were to be transformed into yours, it would mean an improvement in certain aspects, but also a change for the worse on some particularly significant points. Of course, a society cannot remain in an abyss of lawlessness as is the case in our country. But it is also demeaning for it to stay on such a soulless and smooth plane of legalism as is the case in yours. After the suffering of decades of violence and oppression, the human soul longs for things higher, warmer and purer than those offered by today's mass living habits, introduced as by a calling card by the revolting invasion of commercial advertising, by [TV]{.smallcaps} stupor and by intolerable music.

All this is visible to numerous observers from all the worlds of our planet. The Western way of life is less and less likely to become the leading model.

There are telltale symptoms by which history gives warning to a threatened or perishing society. Such are, for instance, a decline of the arts or a lack of great statesmen. Indeed, sometimes the warnings are quite explicit and concrete. The centre of your democracy and of your culture is left without electric power for a few hours only, and all of a sudden crowds of American citizens start looting and creating havoc. The smooth surface film must be very thin, then, the social system quite unstable and unhealthy.

But the fight for our planet, physical and spiritual, a fight of cosmic proportions, is not a vague matter of the future; it has already started. The forces of Evil have begun their decisive offensive; you `<?pagebreak number="425" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter036.html_p425}can feel their pressure, yet your screens and publications are full of prescribed smiles and raised glasses. What is the joy about?

> *Solzhenitsyn was pardoned in 1991, after the collapse of the Soviet Union.*

[•]{.center}
