## Roy Jenkins London, 22 November 1979 {#chapter036.html_pen0003396 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'Home Thoughts from Abroad' {#chapter036.html_pen0003400 .EB10SmallHead}

> *The 1979 Dimbleby Lecture, broadcast annually by the BBC in memory of the great broadcaster Richard Dimbleby, helped to change the course of British politics.*
>
> *Roy Jenkins had resigned as the Labour government's Home Secretary in 1976 to prepare for his appointment as president of the European Economic Community commission and had left the Labour Party. He used the opportunity of the Dimbleby Lecture to voice his disenchantment with the warring ideologies of the two main British political parties and offered the hope of a new party of the centre based on European models.*
>
> *Jenkins offers in his memoirs a fascinating insight into the hard work of writing such a speech. His first attempt at composition occurred on 14 August and by 15 October he had a text, nearly sufficient to fill the forty-eight minutes required. But it was not right. 'It was far too long and leisurely on historical analysis and not nearly strong enough on prescription.' On 1 November he wrote from 9.15 a.m. to 1.00 and then from 3.15 to 8.15 p.m. and had a comprehensive text, about fifteen hundred words too long.*
>
> *Six days later he read a tautened and typed version through during a train journey and did a run-through of the full text at a BBC studio on 12 November. He then continued to titivate the lecture in Brussels until he had to seal it up for the release of copies to the press.*
>
> *On the day of the lecture, he also made three speeches in Brussels before departing for London.*

A few decades ago there were quite a lot of people who believed that a single election victory could be the beginning of the millennium. It `<?pagebreak number="426" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter036.html_p426}was a view perhaps more prevalent, because of greater optimism or utopianism, on the Left than on the Right. It was certainly held by many Labour supporters in 1945. More recently, however, I have the impression that it applies equally or more strongly on the Right.

A governing party must have the self-confidence to want power and to believe that its exercise of it can tilt the country in the right direction. But it should also have the humility to recognize on any likely projection of the past, its power will come to an end, probably in about six years, maybe less, only exceptionally more. The test of its statesmanship in the context of history will not therefore be how many trees it pulls up by the roots but how it fits into a continuous process of adaptation in which leadership is combined with sensitivity to national mood ...

This is not a recipe for inaction or for the avoidance of controversy. Some of the most bitterly contested measures of the past 150 years -- the electoral reform bills, the repeal of the Corn Laws, the curbing of the powers of the House of Lords, the initiation of social security, or, to take an example from the Right, the setting up of independent television -- have been inviolate once they were on the statute book because they quickly became part of the social fabric and could only have been undone at the cost of unacceptable electoral damage to the opposing party.

All this implies a certain respect by politicians for the opinions of their opponents. But that is surely both possible and desirable. In their memoirs, written with the benignity of old age, it generally comes through. Indeed, where bitterness remains, it is more often directed against previous colleagues than against previous opponents.

Yet when they are seeking or exercising power there is only too often a shrill and unconvincing attempt to portray almost everyone on the other side as either a fool or a knave. Each successive Tory government is the most reactionary since that of Lord Liverpool, or some other hobgoblin figure shrouded in the past. Each successive Labour government has been the most rapacious, doctrinaire and unpatriotic conspiracy to be seen this side of the Iron Curtain. Either might, I suppose, be true in the future, but it cannot all have `<?pagebreak number="427" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter036.html_p427}been true in the past, and I do not believe that it either convinces or pleases the electorate.

One major disadvantage of excessive political partisanship is that it fosters precisely the sort of industrial mood which is rapidly turning Britain into a manufacturing desert. If, on the House of Commons floor, it is always the fault of the other side, how can politicians preach convincingly against the prevalence of such a mood on the shop-floor?

This, some people will say with horror, is an unashamed plea for the strengthening of the political centre. Why not? The vocation of politicians ought to be to represent, to channel, to lead the aspirations of the electorate. These aspirations, not on every issue, but in essential direction, pull far more towards the centre than towards the extremes. The general mood is not that of reaction or of putting the clock back. But nor is it one of support for class selfishness or for revolution, whether it be utopian or malevolent.

Our great failure, now for decades past, has been lack of adaptability. Sometimes this rigidity is a source of strength. It was very good not to be too adaptable in 1940. But overall it is a source of weakness. Some societies -- France in the second half of the Third Republic, pre-revolutionary Russia, the Austro-Hungarian Empire -- have been still less adaptable than our own. But they hardly provide grounds for comfort. Compared with post-war Germany, post-war Japan, Fifth Republican France (industrially at least), the United States for virtually the whole of its history, compared for that matter with early Victorian Britain -- modern Britain has been sluggish, uninventive and resistant to voluntary change, not merely economically but socially and politically as well. We cannot successfully survive unless we can make our society more adaptable; and an unadaptable political system works heavily against this. Politicians cannot cling defensively to their present somewhat ossified party and political system while convincingly advocating the acceptance of change everywhere else in industry and society. 'Everybody change but us' is never a good slogan.

The paradox is that we need more change accompanied by more stability of direction. It is a paradox but not a contradiction. Too often we have superficial and quickly reversed political change without `<?pagebreak number="428" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter036.html_p428}much purpose or underlying effect. This is not the only paradox. We need the innovating stimulus of the free-market economy without either the unacceptable brutality of its untrammelled distribution of rewards or its indifference to unemployment. This is by no means an impossible combination. It works well in a number of countries. It means that you accept the broad line of division between the public and the private sectors and do not constantly threaten those in the private sector with nationalization or expropriation.

You encourage them without too much interference to create as much wealth as possible, but use the wealth so created both to give a return for enterprise and to spread the benefits throughout society in a way that avoids the disfigurement of poverty, gives a full priority to public education and health services, and encourages cooperation and not conflict in industry and throughout society. You use taxation for this purpose, but not just to lop off rewards. The state must know its place, which should be an important but far from an omnipotent one. You recognize that there are certain major economic objectives, well beyond merely regulatory ones like the control of the money supply, which can only be achieved by public action, often on an international scale. Two clear contemporary examples are first the breaking of the link, now fairly long-standing, but by no means inevitable, between economic growth and the consumption of oil; and second, by coordinated government purchasing policy, ensuring that this country and Europe as a whole is a major producer and not merely a passive purchaser of the products of the electronic/telecommunications revolution. Success or failure on these two points will largely determine whether we with our partners are a leading or second-rate industrial group in the world of the 1990s. You use market forces to help achieve such objectives but do not for a moment pretend that they, unguided and unaided, can do the whole job.

You also make sure that the state knows its place, not only in relation to the economy, but in relation to the citizen. You are in favour of the right of dissent and the liberty of private conduct. You are against unnecessary centralization and bureaucracy. You want to devolve decision-making wherever you sensibly can. You want parents in the school system, patients in the health service, residents in `<?pagebreak number="429" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter036.html_p429}the neighbourhood, customers in both nationalized and private industry, to have as much say as possible. You want the nation to be self-confident and outward-looking, rather than insular, xenophobic and suspicious. You want the class system to fade without being replaced either by an aggressive and intolerant proletarianism or by the dominance of the brash and selfish values of a 'get rich quick' society. You want the nation, without eschewing necessary controversy, to achieve a renewed sense of cohesion and common purpose.

These are some of the objectives which I believe could be assisted by a strengthening of the radical centre. I believe that such a development could bring into political commitment the energies of many people of talent and goodwill who, although perhaps active in many other voluntary ways, are at present alienated from the business of government, whether national or local, by the sterility and formalism of much of the political game. I am sure this would improve our politics. I think the results might also help to improve our national performance. But of that I cannot be certain. I am against too much dogmatism here. We have had more than enough of it. But at least we could escape from the pessimism of Yeats's 'Second Coming', where

> The best lack all conviction, while the worst
>
> Are full of passionate intensity

and

> Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold.

> *Two Saturdays later both Shirley Williams and Bill Rodgers, who with Jenkins were to be three of the Gang of Four who founded the Social Democratic Party in 1981, visited Jenkins. Neither had been frightened off by the lecture and both were prepared in certain circumstances to break with the Labour Party.*
>
> *Jenkins's lecture proved to be the single most important event in placing on the agenda for serious discussion the idea of a new party in the middle ground of British politics; it was a seminal text of what a new party could stand for.*
>
> *After the SDP was formed, initially with Jenkins as leader, it subsequently `<?pagebreak number="430" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter036.html_p430}entered an alliance with the Liberal Party -- and the alliance briefly threatened to overtake the Labour Party and become the dominant party of opposition to the Tories. After the 1987 general election, the SDP faded away and many members joined a new Liberal Democrat Party. But the threat from the alliance transformed the Labour Party, whose policies became similar to those that Jenkins espoused in his Dimbleby Lecture.*

[•]{.center}
