## Neil Kinnock Bournemouth, 1 October 1985 {#chapter038.html_pen0003649 .EB04MainHead}

#### 'You can't play politics with people's jobs' {#chapter038.html_pen0003653 .EB10SmallHead}

> *As Labour leader from 1983, Neil Kinnock, by insisting on the modernization of the party, prepared the ground which led to New Labour's historic election victory under Tony Blair in 1997. Kinnock made his reputation as leader in this scornful denunciation of the militants of Merseyside in his address to the party conference.*
>
> `<?pagebreak number="452" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter038.html_p452}*Forty-eight hours before the conference the Militant Tendency, which effectively controlled Liverpool City Council, hired a fleet of taxis to send redundancy notices to all council employees. For Militant, led by Derek Hatton, the tactic was a consciousness-raising element of its strategy of confronting the Thatcher government, but Kinnock saw it as cynical extremism that would give Labour a bad name.*
>
> *When the conference met, with Hatton sitting only twenty feet away, Kinnock made a searing denunciation of Militant tactics. Hatton rose to his feet, shouting 'Liar, liar', which only heightened the drama of the leader's declaration of war on the Trotskyists.*

If socialism is to be successful in this country, it must relate to the practical needs and the mental and moral traditions of the men and women of this country. We must emphasize what we have in common with those people who are our neighbours, workmates and fellow countrymen and women -- and we have everything in common with them -- in a way we could not do if we were remote, if, like the Tories, we were in orbit around the realities of our society, if, like the Social Democrats and the Liberals, we stood off from those realities, retreated from them, deserted them. But we are of, from, for the people. That is our identity, that is our commitment, that is how much we have in common with the people. Let us emphasize that, let us demonstrate it, let us not hide it away as if it was something extraordinary or evidence of reaction. Let us emphasize what we have in common with the people of this country.

We must not dogmatize or browbeat. We have got to reason with people; we have got to persuade people. That is their due. We have voluntarily, every one of us, joined a political party. We wish a lot more people would come and join us, help us, give us their counsel, their energies, their advice, broaden our participation. But in making the choice to join a political party we took a decision, and it was that, by persuasion, we hoped that we could bring more people with us. So that is the basis on which we have got to act, want to act ...

\[There is\] something else you know. There is anger in this country at the devastation brought about by these last six years of Tory government, but strangely that anger is mixed with despair, a feeling that `<?pagebreak number="453" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter038.html_p453}the problems are just too great, too complex, to be dealt with by any government or any policy. That feeling is abroad. We disagree with it, we contend it, we try to give people the rational alternatives, but it exists. If our response to that despair, anger and confusion amounts to little more than slogans, if we give the impression to the British people that we believe that we can just make a loud noise and the Tory walls of Jericho will fall down, they are not going to treat us very seriously at all -- and we won't deserve to be treated very seriously ...

I shall tell you again what you know. Because you are from the people, because you are of the people, because you live with the same realities as everybody else lives with, implausible promises don't win victories. I'll tell you what happens with impossible promises. You start with far-fetched resolutions. They are then pickled into a rigid dogma, a code, and you go through the years sticking to that, out-dated, misplaced, irrelevant to the real needs, and you end in the grotesque chaos of a Labour council -- a *Labour council* -- hiring taxis to scuttle round a city handing out redundancy notices to its own workers. I am telling you, no matter how entertaining, how fulfilling to short-term egos -- I'm telling you, and you'll listen -- you can't play politics with people's jobs and with people's services or with their homes. Comrades, the voice of the people -- not the people here; the voice of the real people with real needs -- is louder than all the boos that can be assembled. Understand that, please, comrades. In your socialism, in your commitment to those people, understand it. The people will not, cannot, abide posturing. They cannot respect the gesture-generals or the tendency-tacticians.

Comrades, it seems to me lately that some of our number have become like latter-day public school-boys. It seems it matters not whether you won or lost, but how you played the game. We cannot take that inspiration from Rudyard Kipling. Those game players get isolated, hammered, blocked off. They might try to blame others -- workers, trade unions, some other leadership, the people of the city -- for not showing sufficient revolutionary consciousness, always somebody else, and then they claim a rampant victory. Whose victory? Not victory for the people, not victory for them. I see the casualties; we all see the casualties. They are not to be found amongst `<?pagebreak number="454" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter038.html_p454}the leaders and some of the enthusiasts; they are to be found amongst the people whose jobs are destroyed, whose services are crushed, whose living standards are pushed down to deeper depths of insecurity and misery. Comrades, these are vile times under this Tory government for local democracy, and we have got to secure power to restore real local democracy.

But I look around this country and I see Labour councils, I see socialists, as good as any other socialists, who fought the good fight and who, at the point when they thought they might jeopardize people's jobs and people's services, had the intelligence, yes, and the courage to adopt a different course. They truly put jobs and services first before other considerations. They had to make hellish choices. I understand it. You must agonize with them in the choices they had to make -- very unpalatable, totally undesirable, but they did it. They found ways. They used all their creativity to find ways that would best protect those whom they employed and those whom they were elected to defend. Those people are leaders prepared to take decisions, to meet obligations, to give service. They know life is real, life is earnest -- too real, too earnest to mistake a Conference Resolution for an accomplished fact; too real, too earnest to mistake a slogan for a strategy; too real, too earnest to allow them to mistake their own individual enthusiasms for mass movement; too real, too earnest to mistake barking for biting. I hope that becomes universal too.

Comrades, I offer you this counsel. The victory of socialism, said a great socialist, does not have to be complete to be convincing. I have no time, he went on, for those who appear to threaten the whole of private property but who in practice would threaten nothing; they are purists and therefore barren. Not the words of some hypnotized moderate, not some petrified pragmatist, but Aneurin Bevan in 1950 at the height of his socialist vision and his radical power and conviction. There are some who will say that power and principle are somehow in conflict. Those people who think that power and principle are in conflict only demonstrate the superficiality, the shallowness, of their own socialist convictions; for whilst they are bold enough to preach those convictions in little coteries, they do not have the depth of conviction to subject those convictions, `<?pagebreak number="455" ?>`{=html}[]{#chapter038.html_p455}those beliefs, that analysis, to the real test of putting them into operation in power.

> *Most delegates were delighted by the speech. Kinnock's rating in a Harris poll two days later climbed fourteen points and he overtook Thatcher.*

•
